title: Stream-CQSA: Avoiding Out-of-Memory in Attention Computation via Flexible Workload Scheduling
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: stream-cqsa-avoiding-out-of-memory-in-attention-computation-via-flexible-workload-scheduling
authors: Yiming Bian; Joshua M. Akey
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 13
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20819v1

nt computation pipeline, attention computation can
be viewed as processing a collection (or queue) of subsequence tasks. By iteratively applying CQS
5

Figure 4: Workload management using uniform scheduling (left) and hybrid scheduling (right). The
corresponding tree structure are in Figure 9. The dashed line indicates the memory limit (80GiB).
Divide, the original large-scale attention problem is decomposed into many smaller sub-computations,
enabling a trade-off between memory usage and computation time. This allows attention to scale
beyond the memory limits of a single device.
We conduct a preliminary experiment on the forward pass to illustrate the impact of workload
scheduling. Experiments are performed on an NVIDIA A100 GPU with 80 GiB memory. We set the
sequence length to N= 1M , head dimension D= 128 , batch size B= 1 , number of heads H= 64 ,
and data precision to fp16. As a baseline, we use scaled dot-product attention (SDPA) from PyTorch
(v2.11.0) with the FlashAttention (FA) backend. Stream-CQSA uses a modified FA kernel.
Since N= 1M exceeds the GPU memory capacity, we estimate the memory and runtime of SDPA
by measuring peak memory usage and execution time for sequence lengths ranging from 100K to
900K at a step of 50K, where out-of-memory (OOM) occurs at 900K. We then fit polynomial models
using numpy.polyfit() to estimate memory (degree= 1 ) and runtime (degree= 2 ). A similar
procedure is used to model Stream-CQSA. The results are shown in Figure 8. Stream-CQSA achieves
comparable memory efficiency to SDPA, but incurs additional runtime overhead due to operations
such as mask generation, subsequence gathering, result aggregation, and host-device data transfers.
In contrast, SDPA performs a single data transfer followed by a fused computation on the GPU.
Using the fitted models, we estimate that processing a sequence of length 1M with SDPA requires
approximately 92.53 GiB of memory and 223.22 seconds, which exceeds the memory capacity of
an A100 GPU. In comparison, applying Stream-CQSA with itr= 1 produces 7 subsequences of
length 1M× 3
7 ≈428K , each requiring 52.65 GiB and 110.06 seconds. With itr= 2 , there are 49
subsequences (length ≈183K ), each requiring 22.56 GiB and 19.74 seconds. With itr= 3 , there
are343subsequences (length≈78K), each requiring only4.13GiB and4.13seconds.
Scheduling subsequences that are constructed on the same iteration level, we obtain uniform scheduling. However, CQS Divide does not require uniform decomposition. For example, as shown in
Figure 4 (right), some subsequences at itr= 1 can be further divided to itr= 2 and itr= 3 ,
while others remain unchanged. This enables hybrid scheduling, where subsequences of different
sizes coexist. They can be scheduled dynamically to maximize resource utilization while reduce
the overall computation time. More generally, subsequence computations can be flexibly scheduled
across devices to fully utilize available memory and compute resources.
2.5 OOM guardrails
Stream-CQSA incorporates a guardrail mechanism to prevent GPU OOM failures during execution.
The mechanism is governed by two parameters: itr and n_cap. The parameter itr controls
the divide granularity, and consequently the subsequence length and peak memory footprint. The
parameter n_cap specifies the maximum number of subsequences that can be concurrently loaded
to the GPU. During execution, if a subsequence computation triggers an OOM error, the offending
subsequence is evicted from GPU memory and returned to the scheduling queue. The value of
n_cap is then reduced by one to lower memory pressure for future rounds. If OOM persists even
when n_cap= 1 , the divide granularity is increased to itr=itr+ 1 , thereby producing shorter
subsequences with reduced memory requirements. After increasing itr, n_cap is reset to 1 to
perform a calibration pass, which estimates the memory footprint of the new subsequences and
determines the maximum feasible n_cap under the available memory budget. If OOM occurs during
this calibration step, the divide granularity is further increased until a feasible configuration is found.
6
