title: GeoRelight: Learning Joint Geometrical Relighting and Reconstruction with Flexible Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformers
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: georelight-learning-joint-geometrical-relighting-and-reconstruction-with-flexible-multi-modal-diffusion-transformers
authors: Yuxuan Xue; Ruofan Liang; Egor Zakharov; Timur Bagautdinov; Chen Cao; Giljoo Nam; Shunsuke Saito; Gerard Pons-Moll; Javier Romero
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 15
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20715v1

erence
(e.g. Segmentation, Normal) Input Image Environment
Albedo
❄

Enc
Albedo
(as target)
Normal
(as condition)
iNOD
(as target)
Relit
(as target)
❄

Dec
Figure 3.The GeoRelight Pipeline.GeoRelight processes up to five target modalities, usingc switch to signal which ones are targets and
conditions (the figure shows one specific usecase). It is guided by a global image conditionz I and a specific illumination conditionz E.
being processed. Before being passed to DiT blocks, each
modality’s embedding is broadcast toRH×W×C type and concatenated channel-wise to its corresponding latent. Furthermore, to ensure that a pixel at position (x,y) in one modality
(e.g. relit image) can be spatially correlated with the same
pixel in others (e.g. normal map) in the attention mechanism, we use ashared spatial positional embeddingto replace original temporal 3D RoPE [31] across all modalities,
making the modality’s own position invariant. More specifically, we apply the same 2D RoPE to all modalities.
Finally, the key to our framework’s flexibility is the
modality switch maskc switch∈RH×W×1 . This binary mask,
concatenated to each modality, signals whether it is a
“clear” input condition (use 1) or a “noisy” target to be
generated (use 0). This switch implicitly tells the model
to either condition on this modality or to generate it. This
mechanism is the core enabler for our strategic mixed-data
training (Sec. 3.4) and allows for flexible, powerful control
during inference, as demonstrated in our ablations.
3.2. Joint Relighting and Reconstruction
As illustrated in Figure 3, our model is designed to jointly
denoise five target latent modalities from a single input imageI: intrinsic albedoz a, a segmentation maskz s, surface
normalsz n, geometric shapez g, and final relit imagez IE.
To guide this complex multi-modal generation, we introduce two distinct types of conditioning. We use the original input image asglobal condition. This image contains
the core information about the subject’s identity, shape, and
texture that all target modalities must share. Unlike UniRelight [9], which treats the input as just another modality to
denoise, we concatenate latentz I channel-wise to all five
target modalitiesz m, ensuring its information is present in
every step of the joint denoising process uniformly.
The second is the illumination condition E, which is required only for the relit imagez IE. A key challenge is that
Eis a High Dynamic Range (HDR) map, which the pretrained LDR-based V AE cannot encode faithfully. To solve
this, we follow the established practice of [12, 22] and decompose the HDR map into three LDR-compatible representations: a Reinhard tonemapped [30] panoramaE ldr, a
normalized log-intensity mapE log, and a directional map
Edir. These are encoded into a joint lighting latentz E.
This latent is concatenated only to the relit image latent
zIE, while zero-padded placeholders are used for all other
modalities to maintain a consistent tensor shape.
Thus, the full input for any single modality m in our DiT
is a stack containing its noisy latentz m
τ , the global conditionz I , its specific illumination condition (eitherz E or
zeros), and our flexible conditioning embeddingscmodal and
cswitch. The model is then optimized using a denoising score
matching objective [13]. At inference, this design allows us
to either generate all modalities from pure noise or, by using thec switch, provide any combination of clear modalities
to guide the generation of the others.
3.3. Isotropic Normalized Orthographic Depth
As we established in Sec. 2.2 and 3.1, a V AE-friendly geometry representation is critical for our joint model. Standard point maps are corrupted by V AE encoding and normalized depth is anisotropic (Fig. 2). To solve this, we
propose isotropic Normalized Orthographic Depth (iNOD),
a simple yet effective representation that is dense, V AEfriendly, and perfectly preserves relative 3D geometry.
The creation of an iNOD is straightforward. Given
ground-truth metric depth and camera intrinsics (available
during synthetic data creation), we first unproject the pixels to acquire a metric 3D point cloud. The key step is our
isotropic 3D normalization: instead of scaling only the zaxis, we scale the entire 3D geometry to fit within a [-1, 1]
bounding box based on its longest edge. This operation discards absolute scale but maintains the relative 3D geometry
and aspect ratio of the subject. From this normalized 3D
shape, we orthographically project it onto the XY-plane by
simply taking the z-value of each point. This final orthographic depth map is naturally in the [-1, 1] range required
by the pretrained V AE. We then assign this z-value back to
the corresponding pixel to create a dense, pixel-aligned 2D
map that represents a distortion-free 3D shape.
This iNOD representation has all the properties we require. It is a V AE-friendly 2D image with 1-DoF that
eliminates the noise artifacts seen in point map encoding
with 3-DoF. Most importantly, because the normalization is
isotropic, the 3D non-distorted shape can be recovered with
a simple orthographic unprojection, eliminating the need
for camera intrinsics during inference, which is a major advantage over standard depth maps. We find that V AE compression can create boundary artifacts due to nearest neighbor sampling, so we apply a simple dilation to the iNOD
foreground, which results in a clean and robust geometry
4
