title: GeoRelight: Learning Joint Geometrical Relighting and Reconstruction with Flexible Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformers
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: georelight-learning-joint-geometrical-relighting-and-reconstruction-with-flexible-multi-modal-diffusion-transformers
authors: Yuxuan Xue; Ruofan Liang; Egor Zakharov; Timur Bagautdinov; Chen Cao; Giljoo Nam; Shunsuke Saito; Gerard Pons-Moll; Javier Romero
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 16
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20715v1

ndary artifacts due to nearest neighbor sampling, so we apply a simple dilation to the iNOD
foreground, which results in a clean and robust geometry
4

High-Resolution
Image Generation
Multi-View
Generation
Multi-View
Mesh Carving
Textured Mesh
High Resolution,
DR RGBX GTInput Our
Not
Available
Not
Available
Not
Available
/home/yuxuanxue/Downloads/1024/auto-labeling/dataloader_lighticon_autolabeling/debug_georelight_lighticon_autolabeling_1/
/home/yuxuanxue/Downloads/1024/auto-labeling/example_dataloading/
/home/yuxuanxue/Downloads/1028/debug_georelight_itw_autolabeling/
Synthetic
Light
Stage
In-the-wild
Input Environment SegmentationRelit Albedo Normal Dilated iNOD Decoded 3D Geometry from iNOD (for reference)
Auto-Labeled Intrinsics
Figure 4.Our Strategic Mixed-Data Training Sources.We combine (a) fully-labeled Synthetic data, (b) Light Stage data with paired
lighting, and (c) In-the-wild data. We use our synthetic data pre-trained model to auto-label intrinsics for (b) and (c).
Mode Clear Latent Noisy Latent Global Condition Dataset
Default -z all zI,zE Synth,Dome
Renderingz a,zn,zg,zs zIE zE Synth,DomeIntrinsic→Relitza,zn,zg,zs zIE -ITW
Geometry→Relitzn,zg,zs zIE,za zE Synth,DomeRelit→GeometryzIE,za,zs zn,zg -Synth
Table 1.Strategic training for mixing synthetic and real data.
boundary after decoding shown in Fig. 2. Please refer to our
supplementary for detailed instructions on creating iNOD.
3.4. Strategic Mixed Post-Training
A fundamental challenge for using synthetic data is the
“synthetic-real gap”. Synthetic data provides perfect
ground-truth labels but it may result in a model that achieves
less photorealism. Conversely, real-world images are photorealistic but lack the ground-truth intrinsics and geometry
labels, and are extremely complicated to acquire.
To solve this, we first create a hybrid dataset. In our
observation, synthetic trained model achieves good intrinsics and geometry recovery. Hence, we leverage our initially trained synthetic model to “auto-label” [22] our realworld data sources: a high-quality light stage data (Dome)
as in [25, 37] and a large-scale in-the-wild dataset (ITW)
from [19, 21]. This step provides us with pseudo-groundtruth intrinsics (za,z n,z g,z s ) for our photorealistic data.
Our light stage data contains paired relit images with
light position and intensity from controllable LEDs. However, the ITW data lacks paired relit images and target illumination. We therefore designed a strategic mixed posttraining approach, detailed in Table 1, which leverages the
full flexibility of our multi-modal architecture (Sec. 3.1).
Instead of one monolithic task, we train the model on different tasks tailored to the strengths of each data source.
On ourSynthandDomedatasets, where we have complete labels, we train the full joint pipeline using the “Default” and “Rendering” modes. This teaches the model
the physical relationships between geometry, intrinsics,
and lighting. For images inITW, we use a specialized
“Intrinsic→Relit” task. In this mode, we provide our autolabeled intrinsics as a clear condition (by settingc switch= 1)
and task the model with denoising only the original, photorealistic imagez IE. Unavailable conditions such as input
Iand illuminationEare dropped as 0. This crucial step
directly teaches the model how to synthesize photorealistic
human appearance from its own intrinsic predictions, using real-world images as the target, without ever needing a
ground-truth relit pair. This strategic use of our flexible architecture allows the model to learn physical accuracy from
synthetic data while simultaneously learning complex, realistic appearance from in-the-wild data, all within a single
unified framework.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experiment Settings
Implementation DetailsWe initialize our DiT from the
inverse rendering model of DiffusionRenderer-Cosmos7B [22] and use the pretrained Cosmos causal V AE, which
remains frozen. Our training is conducted in two stages.
First, we train purely on synthetic data for 30K steps to
learn the fundamental disentanglement of intrinsics and relighting. We then use this model to "auto-label" our realworld datasets. Then, we apply our strategic mixed-data
training (Sec. 3.4) for 10K steps, training on a combined
dataset of synthetic and real data. A training batch contains
128 samples at resolution of832×1280pixels from our hybrid dataset. The total training of two stages takes around
5 days on 64 A100 GPUs. Our 7B-parameter DiT requires
5
