title: GeoRelight: Learning Joint Geometrical Relighting and Reconstruction with Flexible Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformers
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: georelight-learning-joint-geometrical-relighting-and-reconstruction-with-flexible-multi-modal-diffusion-transformers
authors: Yuxuan Xue; Ruofan Liang; Egor Zakharov; Timur Bagautdinov; Chen Cao; Giljoo Nam; Shunsuke Saito; Gerard Pons-Moll; Javier Romero
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 17
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20715v1

lution of832×1280pixels from our hybrid dataset. The total training of two stages takes around
5 days on 64 A100 GPUs. Our 7B-parameter DiT requires
5

High-Resolution
Image Generation
Multi-View
Generation
Multi-View
Mesh Carving
Textured Mesh
High Resolution,
w/o GeometryInput
Not
Available
Joint Modeling
Relit Albedo NormalRelit Albedo
(a)Geometry is essential for relighting.Our full "Joint Modeling" (right)
captures 3D-dependent effects (wrinkles, shadows) absent in the "w/o Geometry" baseline (left).
High-Resolution
Image Generation
Multi-View
Generation
Multi-View
Mesh Carving
Textured Mesh
High Resolution,
Input
Not
Available
w/ novel RelitJoint Modeling
process_SUBJECT_C006_POSE_02_Cam10/
Novel Relit as clear latentGenerated Normal Generated Normal
(b)Relighting provides shape-from-shading.Given a uniformly lit input
(left), a smooth normal is produced (middle). A relit as condition provides
novel shading cues and enhances high-frequency normal generation (right).
Figure 5.Ablation studies validating the synergy of joint modeling.
Relighting Normal Point
Ablation PSNR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓ Ang.↓ CD.↓
w/o Geometry 21.19 0.976 0.0286 - w/ GT Geometry 26.96 0.986 0.0138 - Joint Modeling 27.49 0.985 0.0149 - w/o Appearance - - - 12.24 1.00
w/ GT Appearance - - - 8.55 0.66
Joint Modeling - - - 9.10 0.58
Table 2.Ablation Study on the Synergy of Joint Modeling.We
validate our core claims on the synthetic dataset. First ablation
proves that geometry is essential for high-fidelity relighting. Second ablation proves that relighting provides shape-from-shading
cues that improve geometry.
17.5 GB VRAM for inference on a single A100 GPU, generating all five modalities in approximately 35 seconds per
image. Please refer to supplementary for more details in
implementation and training.
Evaluation DetailsFirst we evaluate on synthetic data,
which contains 42 identities with ground-truth for all
modalities from our synthetic dataset. Then, we evaluate
on 50 identities from our light stage captures. We also evaluate on HumanOLAT [32]. Following official instruction,
we generate ground-truth relit images by combining provided OLAT data. We provide extensive qualitative results
on in-the-wild images here and in our supplementary.
For relighting, we quantitatively compare against opensource baselines [12, 22, 45, 47] with PSNR, LPIPS, and
RMSE computed on foreground subject. We also provide
qualitative comparison and user study with [26]. For geometry, we compare against feed-forward point map predictors [33, 35]. We report Chamfer distance and F-score
on the normalized and ICP-aligned [1] geometry to groundtruth shape. For intrinsics, we evaluate normal estimation
against [16, 22, 35, 46] with angular error and RMSE. For
albedo estimation we compare against [22, 46] using PSNR,
SSIM, and LPIPS. Please refer to our supplementary for detailed evaluation protocol.
4.2. Ablation Studies: Validating our Design
Before comparing to external baselines, we first validate
the core claims of our paper: that our multi-modal synergetic generation of geometry and relighting, and mixed-data
strategy are helpful for high-quality performance.
Geometry is essential for RelightingWe compare three
different modes: Joint Modeling (generating geometry and
relighting together); w/GT Geometry (take ground-truth geometry as clear latent and set up switchcswitch = 1to generate relit image); w/o Geometry (only generate relit without
joint generation of geometry). Tab. 2 and Fig. 5a clearly
demonstrates how important the geometry information is
for relighting: joint modeling of geometry leads to finegrained details such as shadow and clothing wrinkles, while
the "w/o Geometry" mode fails to capture these geometrydependent effects. Please refer to supplementary for details.
Relighting provides shape-from-shadingTo prove this,
we conduct the reverse experiment. We compare our "Joint
Modeling" mode against generation "w/o Appearance" and
"w/ GT Appearance". Figure 5b shows that when the model
is given a ground-truth relit image from HumanOLAT as
a clear latent condition, it generates a much more detailed
and accurate normal map. This demonstrates that the appearance of shading provides critical information that our
model successfully uses to refine geometry estimation.
In-the-wild data corrects lighting biasWe further analyze
the specific contribution of our in-the-wild (ITW) data. As
shown in Fig. 9, training with onlySynth+Domedata already improves realism over synthetic-only training, but introduces a “dark bias” in the relit outputs. This is because
the light stage captures use sparse LED activations (10-20
out of 1024 lights), resulting in predominantly dark training
images that skew the model’s output distribution. Incorporating large-scaleITWdata with diverse, real-world lighting
conditions corrects this bias, producing relit images with
balanced and natural illumination.
Generalizing iNOD Beyond HumansWhile we focus on
human subjects in this work, iNOD is a general-purpose
representation that is not inherently limited to any specific category. In supplementary, we validate that iNOD
faithfully encodes and decodes 3D geometry for subjects
with increasing Depth-to-Height (D:H) ratios, from humans
(∼0.1) to objects like buildings (3.0). The representation
6
