title: GeoRelight: Learning Joint Geometrical Relighting and Reconstruction with Flexible Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformers
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: georelight-learning-joint-geometrical-relighting-and-reconstruction-with-flexible-multi-modal-diffusion-transformers
authors: Yuxuan Xue; Ruofan Liang; Egor Zakharov; Timur Bagautdinov; Chen Cao; Giljoo Nam; Shunsuke Saito; Gerard Pons-Moll; Javier Romero
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 20
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20715v1

g and reconstruction. Besides, joint
estimating geometry and appearance for relightable 3D human generation [41–43] can be a downstream application.
8

Supplementary Material
In this supplementary document, we provide further details
about the implementation details, training data, evaluation
protocol, etc. We also show additional comparison with
state-of-the-art approaches. Please refer to our supplementary video for additional visualization of our results. Finally, we discuss limitations of our model and potential future works.
6. Additional Implementation Details
This section provides further details on our network architecture and training procedure, expanding on Sec. 4.1 of the
main paper.
6.1. Model Architecture
Base ModelOur model’s architecture is a Diffusion
Transformer (DiT) [29]. We initialize our weights
from the publicly available inverse rendering model of
DiffusionRenderer-Cosmos-7B [22], which is built upon
the Cosmos-Predict-1 7B DiT [27].
Causal V AE Latent SpaceWe operate in the latent space
of the pretrained Cosmos causal V AE [27], which can process both image or videos. The V AE remains frozen during
our training. This V AE has a spatial compression factor
of 8. Therefore, our input images at a training resolution
of832×1280pixels are encoded into a latent space of
104×160. The channel dimension is 16. All five target
modalities (za,z n,z g,z s,z IE) and the global image condition (z I) and illumination condition (z E) share this latent
resolution.
Target Modality Latent
…
🔥
optimizable
Multi-Modal DiT
Input Image ConditionIllumination ConditionType Embedding Modality Switch
Modality 5
…
Modality 1
Target Modality Latent
Input Image ConditionIllumination ConditionType Embedding Modality Switch
Figure 10.Conditioning on the modality latent.
Each modality latent after conditioning have the shape
RH×W×C(16+16+3∗16+3+1) . Different modalities are concatenated "temporal-wise" to a sampleR M×H×W×C in one
batch.
6.2. Detailed DiT Conditioning
As illustrated in Fig. 10, our architecture adapts a standard
DiT block to accept our multi-modal conditioning. The total
input to the DiT for a single modalitymis a channel-wise
concatenation of several features that are added to the noisy
latentz m
τ before the first DiT block.
• Global Conditionz I: The V AE-encoded latent of the input imageI. This is concatenated to all five target modalities to provide shared identity and shape information.
• Illumination Condition (z E): The V AE-encoded latent of
the three LDR light maps (Eldr,E log,E dir). This is concatenated only to the relit image latentz IE and is zeropadded for all other modalities.
• Modality Type Embedding (c modal): A learnable embedding of shapeR M×C type (whereM=5,C type = 3) that
is broadcast to the latent spatial resolution and concatenated. This informs the model which modality it is currently processing (e.g., albedo vs. normal).
• Modality Switch Mask (c switch): A binary mask of shape
RH×W×1 that is broadcast and concatenated. It signals whether the modality is a "clear" condition (1) or a
"noisy" target (0).
These concatenated features∈R H×W×(16+16+3∗16+3+1)
are then processed by the DiT. We replace the original 3D
RoPE positional embeddings with a shared 2D RoPE [31]
that is applied to all modalities. This ensures that spatial position (x,y) is aligned across all modalities, which is critical
for learning cross-modal correlations.
6.3. Training Details
Hardware and OptimizerOur model is trained on 64
NVIDIA A100 (80GB) GPUs. We use the AdamW [18] optimizer with a constant learning rate of2×10 −5, a weight
decay of 0.01, and enable bfloat16 mixed-precision training. Our total effective batch size is 128, distributed across
all GPUs.
Two Stage TrainingAs described in the main paper (Sec
4.1), our training is conducted in two distinct stages:
1. Stage 1 (Synthetic Pre-training): We first train the model
for 30,000 steps exclusively on our syntheticSynth
dataset. This stage teaches the model the fundamental disentanglement of intrinsics, geometry, and lighting.
The resulting model from this stage is then used as our
"auto-labeler" for the real-world datasets.
2. Stage 2 (Mixed Post-Training): We then finetune the
model from Stage 1 for an additional 10,000 steps. In
this stage, we train on a combined hybrid dataset of
synthetic, light stage, and in-the-wild data, applying the
strategic tasks outlined in our main paper’s Table 1. The
batch is composed by sampling from our datasets with
9
