title: GeoRelight: Learning Joint Geometrical Relighting and Reconstruction with Flexible Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformers
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: georelight-learning-joint-geometrical-relighting-and-reconstruction-with-flexible-multi-modal-diffusion-transformers
authors: Yuxuan Xue; Ruofan Liang; Egor Zakharov; Timur Bagautdinov; Chen Cao; Giljoo Nam; Shunsuke Saito; Gerard Pons-Moll; Javier Romero
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 21
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20715v1

e, and in-the-wild data, applying the
strategic tasks outlined in our main paper’s Table 1. The
batch is composed by sampling from our datasets with
9

the following probabilities: 33%Synth, 35%Dome,
32%ITW.
6.4. Inference Runtime
We report our method’s inference speed on a single
NVIDIA A100 80GB GPU. For a single input image at our
test resolution of832×1280, the full joint-generation process takes approximately 35 seconds. This time include 35
diffusion sampling steps, V AE decoding time, and I/O time
for saving the results.
6.5. Ablation Details
We provide more details about implementation of ablation
study in main paper section 4.2. The quantitative ablation
study was reported on full-body subset of our synthetic evaluation dataset because full-body images contain more wrinkles compared to face-only subset.
Geometry is essential for RelightingWe compare three
distinct modes to validate this claim:
• Joint Modeling: The model generates all five modalities
(relit image, albedo, normal, segmentation, and geometry) simultaneously from noise.
• w/ GT Geometry: We replace the initial noise of the
geometry modalities (iNOD, normal, segmentation) with
the ground-truth latent representations. We set their corresponding switch masks toc switch = 1(condition) and
keep them fixed (clear) during the reverse sampling process, forcing the model to generate the relit image conditioned on perfect geometry.
• w/o Geometry: We disable the generation of geometry
modalities. To keep the input tensor dimensions consistent with our architecture, we replace the geometry latents with zero-tensors. This formulation is analogous
to the dropped-condition scenario in classifier-free guidance [10], effectively removing geometric guidance from
the generation process.
Relighting helps Shape-from-Shading.To validate the
synergistic effect of appearance on geometry, we compare
the following modes:
•w/o Appearance:We isolate the geometry generation by
suppressing the relighting modality. Similar to the “w/o
Geometry” setting, we replace the relit image latentz IE
and the illumination conditionz E with zero-tensors, effectively forcing the model to hallucinate geometry from
the input imageIalone, without any shading cues from
the new lighting context.
•w/ GT Appearance:We provide the ground-truth relit
image as a strong conditioning signal. We encode the GT
relit image into latent space and set its switch mask to
cswitch = 1. This allows the model to explicitly use the
LED Positions
Processed Environment Map
Figure 11.Processed Environment Illumination from LightStage.From the 3-dimensional LED positions, we project it to a
latlong image to model the environement map.
shading and shadows present in the target relit image to
refine the surface normals and iNOD geometry.
7. Detailed Data Creation and Sources
In this section, we provide a detailed breakdown of the three
data sources used in our hybrid dataset, as first introduced
in Sec. 3.4 of the main paper and visually summarized in
our main paper’s Figure 4.
7.1. Synthetic Data
The synthetic dataset forms the foundation of our method.
Its primary purpose is to provide a large corpus of
physically-accurate, fully-labeled data to train our Stage
1 model. We create 1000 high-quality, artist-created 3D
human meshes, which contain detailed facial components
(eyes, teeth, hair). We augment it to 8000 identities by rigging for pose variation. We pair these with a library of
high-quality PBR texture maps for clothing (albedo, normal, roughness).
Our system is built with Blender, and images are rendered with the Cycles renderer. For each of the 8000 appearance samples, we render it under 400 random HDR
environment maps, creating a large-scale training set. For
each rendered scene, we save all five of our target modalities: the relit image (I E), albedo (a), segmentation mask
(s), surface normals (n), and our novel iNOD geometry (g),
which is computed from the ground-truth metric depth and
camera intrinsics.
As noted in our main paper, this synthetic-only model
yields satisfactory intrinsics but lacks photorealism in the
final relit image, which motivates our hybrid-data approach.
7.2. Light Stage Data
The Dome dataset is our high-quality, real-world dataset
that acts as a bridge between synthetic data and in-the-wild
images. It is sourced from the Codec Avatar Studio [25]
and Relightable Full-Body Gaussian Codec Avatars [37]
datasets.
10
