title: GeoRelight: Learning Joint Geometrical Relighting and Reconstruction with Flexible Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformers
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: georelight-learning-joint-geometrical-relighting-and-reconstruction-with-flexible-multi-modal-diffusion-transformers
authors: Yuxuan Xue; Ruofan Liang; Egor Zakharov; Timur Bagautdinov; Chen Cao; Giljoo Nam; Shunsuke Saito; Gerard Pons-Moll; Javier Romero
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 23
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20715v1

e ground-truth metric depth and
known camera intrinsics. The process, detailed in Algorithm 1, is designed to be simple, fast, and distortion-free.
11

Figure 13.Limitation of Point Map in Latent Space.As a
popular geometry representation [33, 36] in image sapce, point
map shows strong limitation in latent space. Although visually the
point map looks similar before and after V AE, the boundary lost
huge precision (please zoom in) and it contains much noise after
V AE.
The key steps are (1) Unprojection to a metricallyaccurate 3D point cloud, (2) Isotropic Normalization where
the entire point cloud is scaled to fit a[−1,1]cube based on
its longest axis, and (3) Orthographic Projection where we
simply take thez-value of the normalized points and write
it into a 2D map. This process preserves the relative 3D
geometry and aspect ratio of the subject while ensuring the
final 2D map is in a V AE-friendly[−1,1]range.
8.2. Dilation for V AE Artifacts
As noted in the main paper (Sec. 3.3) and visually demonstrated in our main paper’s Fig. 2, the pretrained Cosmos
V AE [27], like most V AEs, can struggle with the extremely
sharp boundaries of a foreground silhouette against a blank
background.
When a standard iNOD map is passed through the V AE
(encoded and then decoded), this compression can introduce minor "ringing" or noise artifacts at the very edge of
the geometry. To solve this and ensure a clean, robust geometric boundary after decoding, we apply a simple 2D morphologicaldilationoperation to the iNOD map before it is
passed to the V AE. We use the assign neighbor iNOD value
to dilated pixels. The background pixels are assigned to 0.
This slightly thickens the silhouette’s boundary, providing
a small buffer that is more robust to the V AE’s lossy compression. After decoding, we use original mask to "cut off"
the dilated region which contains noise. Then we obtain
noise-free iNOD geometry.
The effectiveness of this simple step is shown in Fig.2
in main paper. The non-dilated iNOD produces noticeable
boundary artifacts after being decoded, while the dilated
version results in a clean, sharp, and artifact-free geometric boundary.
9. Evaluation Details
This section provides additional specifics on the baseline
configurations and metric implementations used for the
comparisons in our main paper (Sec 4.3).
To ensure a fair and reproducible comparison, we used
publicly available code and pretrained models for all baselines wherever possible. We also tried our best effort for
evaluating close-sourced human-centric relighting methods
by contacting their authors. Due to license of our evaluation data [32], we are prohibited to redistribute any of them
to conduct quantitative comparison. Hence, we share our
in-the-wild evaluation images and focus on qualitative comparison and user study with them.
9.1. Baseline Configurations
Appearance BaselinesFor methods taking square images [12, 45, 46] as input, we pad our vertical image horizontally and resize to the desired input resolution. For others we directly resize our image into their desired resolution.
For DiLightNet [45] which takes additional text prompt
as input, we use the unified prompt "A real photo of a human". For IC-Light [47] which takes background image instead of environment map as input, we render background
image from conditioning environment map using Blender
and use as its input.
For closed-source baselines, we get reply from authors of
LuxPostFacto [26] and deeply appreciate them for sharing
inference results onface croppedin-the-wild images with
us. LuxPostFacto is a face-centric relighting methods and
can have downgrading performance when the input face
crop is small or blurry. For TotalRelighting [28], SynthLight [6], and SwitchLight [17], we cannot get reply from
authors on time and will include the comparison at first moment when we obtain their inference results from authors.
Geometry BaselinesFor VGGT [33], we use the 1B
model and pad our input image into square format and
resize to the desired input resolution. For MoGe2 [35]
we use the largest model which has 331M parameters and
supports metric-scale reconstruction and normal estimation.
For Sapiens [16], we use the normal normal estimator with
2B parameters.
9.2. Metric Implementation Details
Relighting and Albedo EvaluationTo mitigate the factor of scale ambiguity in lighting and albedo, we follow
the protocol from DiffusionRenderer [22] and apply chromatic alignment (a scale-invariant evaluation) between the
ground-truth and predicted images for all evaluated methods. All metrics are computed on the foreground pixels.
Geometry (Point Cloud) EvaluationAs described in the
main paper, we compare against feed-forward estimators
(VGGT, MoGe2) that predict point maps. Our evaluation
process is as follows:
12
