title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 13
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ren M., Elaine M. Worzala, and Pernille H. Christensen, eds. The Future of Real Estate Education: From Pedagogy to Technology. Taylor & Francis, 2026.

xv
Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark: Building an AI evaluation methodology from a meta-ethic viewpoint. This chapter is the primary output from my year-long internship at Google Research in the department of AI Ethics. Publication of this benchmark will remain in this thesis. Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras: A Letter to Generative AI. This chapter forms the basis of a linked pair of papers currently under review. Traversals, Not Tokens: Movement, Time, and Evaluation in Generative AI “Current evaluation of generative AI treats outputs as stable indicators of capability, but this misses how behaviour emerges through path-dependent interactions shaped by prompts, memory, tools, and context. This paper argues for evaluating trajectories rather than outputs alone, introducing semantic friction and ripple propagation as constructs to capture resistance, sensitivity, and downstream effects. It advances a methodological framework that treats systems as trajectory-producing sociotechnical processes, where evaluation focuses on how behaviour unfolds over time, how it responds to perturbation, and how early actions shape later outcomes.” Evaluating Agentic AI Systems: Governance in Machine-Society-Human Loops “Current AI evaluation relies on static benchmarks and model-level tests, which break down once systems operate as agents with memory, tools, and ongoing workflows. These approaches assume behaviour is stable and context-independent, mischaracterising how outputs are shaped through interaction. This paper proposes a relational framework based on MaSH Loops, where behaviour emerges across recursive feedback between models, users, and institutions. Evaluation is therefore not just measurement but governance, requiring methods that track behaviour over time and account for prompts, tools, and memory as structuring conditions of agentic systems.”
