title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 14
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

governance, requiring methods that track behaviour over time and account for prompts, tools, and memory as structuring conditions of agentic systems.”

Prologue: Catching the Tiger’s Tail xvi
SCHOLARSHIPS, INTERNSHIP, AND FUNDING This research was supported by an Australian Government Research Training Program (RTP) Scholarship and The University of Sydney. I was awarded the Paulette Isabel Jones Career award (2025) by The University of Sydney. I was awarded The University of Sydney Postgraduate Research Prize for Leadership (2023) I was awarded a scholarship from MIT to attend the EmTech conference in Cambridge, Massachusetts at the MIT Media Lab. I was awarded a scholarship from Stanford to attend a technology focussed Embedded Ethics conference at the Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence center. I undertook a one-year internship at Google Research in the Ethical AI department. This internship was organised by Dr Ben Hutchinson. The role was funded and included travel to San Francisco and Mountain View, California to take part in internal symposiums. I received funding from Professor Dean Rickles, Professor Dominic Murphy, The School of History and Philosophy of Science (Faculty of Science, The University of Sydney), Professor Kimberlee Weatherall, and Student Life (The University of Sydney) to run two large conferences. The conferences were called ChatLLM23 (approximately 100 in-person attendees and 100 virtual attendees) and ChatRegs23 (an invited AI governance workshop of approximately 40 people). ChatLLM23 was the largest AI Ethics conference held in Australia at the time, in March 2023. ChatRegs23 used early access to OpenAI’s GPT-4 to assist with gathering and reporting participant views on proposed Australian AI ethics guidelines. Both these conferences were supported by the work of research students and by the staff at the Sydney Informatics Hub (The University of Sydney) under Dr Gordon McDonald. I received funding from the Deputy Vice Chancellor of Education, Professor Pip Pattison and from the Sydney University Postgraduate Representatives Association to run a graduate student conference called ConnectHDR (approximately 400 graduate students and 100 industry representatives). This was the largest recorded full-day graduate conference in the history of the University, aimed at connecting research students with industry.
