title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 19
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

er that what we observe is not nature herself, but nature exposed to our method of questioning” Werner Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy (1958) [167]

Prologue: Catching the Tiger’s Tail 3
INTRODUCTION: CATCHING THE TIGER’S TAIL At the cross-currents of Generative AI and the Philosophy of AI, this thesis asks what it means to grasp the tiger’s tail amid turbulence and speed 1. It does so by drawing on a deliberately wide set of traditions: philosophy of mind, measurement theory, ethics, cybernetics, cognitive science, quantum mechanics, participatory realism, sociotechnical systems theory, sociology, and moral value pluralism. These are not scattered ornaments, but carefully chosen tools, each brought in to clarify specific aspects of a technology. Philosophy of AI is not new, but its engagement with generative AI remains comparatively under-consolidated; definitions are unsettled, frameworks are contested, and methods are still in flux. The pace of the field compounds these tensions. Research on ethical and responsible generative AI now outstrips any one scholar’s ability to follow it closely. Release papers from major firms often foreground capability claims, treat ethics briefly, and circulate without external review. At the same time, slow peer review leaves preprints and arXiv drafts shaping debate before ideas are properly tested. In such conditions, philosophical clarity and methodological rigour are not luxuries; they are safeguards. This thesis asks how generative AI should be evaluated when the systems themselves are probabilistic, socially embedded, and value-laden. I argue that evaluation should not treat models as isolated predictors alone. Instead, it should make visible how values are enacted across recursive machine, society, and human relations. On that basis, I develop MaSH Loops and the World Values Benchmark (WVB), a descriptive method that compares model value profiles with social-science baselines while controlling for prompt sensitivity and anchor bias. MaSH Loops differ from generic sociotechnical mapping by treating evaluation itself as a recursive site of value enactment across machine, institutional, and human feedback. Through two case studies, early GPT-3 and AI in real estate, I show how evaluation choices shape what becomes legible as model behaviour. The project began with a simple concern: powerful systems were arriving fast, and the ethical guardrails looked thin. Stories like Buolamwini’s Gender Shades [59] and other early work on bias [291, 354, 403] in deployed systems made clear that measurement failures could translate into real harm. I wanted to understand not only how values enter systems, but how we might measure those movements without collapsing plural perspectives into a single normative score. 1 From Burmese tradition, “grasping the tiger’s tail” means being trapped in danger: you cannot let go safely, yet holding on is perilous. I use it here to describe the Philosophy of AI’s engagement with Generative AI: unavoidable, precarious, and where the danger lies as much in our methods of measurement as in the systems themselves.
