title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 20
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

engagement with Generative AI: unavoidable, precarious, and where the danger lies as much in our methods of measurement as in the systems themselves.

Prologue: Catching the Tiger’s Tail 4
That pursuit shaped my research journey. In early 2021, I fought for months for access to GPT-3, finally receiving the “green light” on 25 May. With a small group of PhD peers, we began exploratory tests that revealed cultural value drift; work that seeded Chapter 2. In parallel, I founded the PhD Students in AI Ethics network, which quickly grew into an international community of more than 400 researchers. It reinforced the sense that we were all working in terrain that was both urgent and under-defined. From 2021 to 2022, a year-long internship at Google Research in the Ethical AI team shifted my focus. Insider access to models such as Language Model for Dialogue Applications (LaMDA) and Pathways Language Model (PaLM) raised a deeper question: not what models can do, but what our measurement choices make them appear to do. I read every LLM release paper like a digital archaeologist, poring over appendices to excavate hidden assumptions: proxy tasks, fragile validity claims, missing contexts. This thesis records that excavation: the attempt to catch the tiger’s tail not only of the models themselves, but of the evaluative practices racing to contain them. Between 2020 and 2025, the ground kept moving. Models shifted from closed-door APIs to mass public adoption. Benchmarks proliferated, often treated as definitive leaderboards, even when their constructs needed deep scrutiny. Media discourse amplified existential-risk narratives and near-consciousness hype promoted by some AI factions, while questions of immediate sociotechnical impact and measurement validity often struggled for oxygen. Those debates repeatedly returned to one question: why did some developers see species-level threats while many AI ethicists took a different view? The answer I arrived at is a shift in evaluative perspective. Evaluation should be descriptive, pluralist, and enactivist: it should capture distributions rather than single verdicts, reveal assumptions rather than conceal them, and map recursive MaSH Loops rather than isolate outputs. The epistemological conflicts of the AI debates were not just about risk itself but about how risk was being measured. Many trained in functionalist traditions of engineering and computer science gravitated toward computationalism as a philosophy of mind, leading them to interpret machine behaviour through functionalist assumptions. This thesis argues that such assumptions are not neutral: they are design choices embedded in our instruments of measurement. CONTRIBUTIONS AND AIMS The central aim of this research is to understand generative systems and their embedded values, and to show how evaluation can make those values legible. This thesis makes three linked contributions: 1. Conceptual: It develops MaSH Loops as an enactivist evaluation framework that moves beyond, without discarding, functionalist and constructivist analysis by shifting the unit of analysis from isolated outputs to recursive machine, society, and human interaction.
