title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 23
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ce: to study generative AI responsibly requires not just stitching together methods but rethinking the very instruments and assumptions of evaluation.

Prologue: Catching the Tiger’s Tail 7
Alongside philosophers, this unsettled space has attracted computer scientists and engineers who turn eagerly to philosophy, though at times without engaging its depth. Their contributions are valuable but sometimes produce a patchwork Franken-philosophy of AI: conceptual borrowing without context, sociotechnical theories misapplied, or ethical categories flattened into engineering checklists. Such moves risk distorting the very traditions they draw from, obscuring rather than clarifying the nature of generative systems. Working in this space requires constant code-switching. With philosophers, the pace and opacity of technical change can feel like a moat; part of my role is to lower the drawbridge, making models, data, and evaluation details legible without jargon. With engineers, I’m asked to show why uncovering normative assumptions and applying philosophical measurement theory matter. With policymakers, I translate pluralist arguments into practical and accountable governance recommendations. These shifts are rarely easy, and disciplinary silos often solidify. The AI ethics and safety debates of 2022–2023 demonstrated this vividly, as factions closed ranks around existential risk or sociotechnical harm, leaving little space for dialogue across paradigms. Interdisciplinarity requires humility: engineers recognising the depth and rigour of the humanities, and philosophers respecting the practical constraints of technical work. Only with mutual respect for each field’s expertise can we avoid superficial borrowing and begin the harder work of building shared, reflexive instruments for understanding AI. THESIS ROADMAP Chapter 1, Epistemological Rumbles This chapter shows why functionalist approaches to understanding LLMs (i.e. computationalism) and constructivist critique keep talking past each other. The chapter also proposes an enactivist alternative (MaSH) for evaluation protocols. Chapter 1 grew out of the “AI Twitter wars” of 2023, where debates swung between existential risk and immediate sociotechnical harms. I was drawn into those disputes, often defending the role of philosophy against claims it should be excluded from computer science training. That deep engagement led to an invitation to contribute to an AI Ethics handbook. In preparing my contribution, I kept returning to a question I was asked repeatedly in interviews, panels, and conferences: why did figures such as the “Godfather of AI” see sparks of pre-consciousness in LLMs when others, including myself, did not? Beneath the noise of these opposing narratives, I came to see a clash of epistemologies: functionalism and computationalism on one side, constructivism on the other. The missing bridge, I realised, was enactivism. That insight became the reason I chose to open the thesis with an epistemological map. Chapter 2, The Ghost in the Machine Has an American Accent
