title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 24
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ism. That insight became the reason I chose to open the thesis with an epistemological map. Chapter 2, The Ghost in the Machine Has an American Accent

Prologue: Catching the Tiger’s Tail 8
This chapter is an historical snapshot (2021) of value drift in early GPT-3, using culturally charged inputs to surface normative “accents” and motivate distributional evaluation. This is where the problem first showed itself. Chapter 2 began with early access to GPT-3 in 2021. With collaborators across countries and languages, through a network I founded in 2020 (PhD Students in AI Ethics) we observed value drift: outputs that reframed inputs in surprising normative directions. Our preprint became widely cited, but the realisation was deeper: documenting early, unaligned models matter, because later fine-tuning can mask their normative imprints. This chapter preserves that history while connecting it to the broader thesis. Chapter 3, The Model is Not the Market An applied translation in AI-Real Estate. Although this chapter is not confined to LLMs, that is deliberate: it shows that the thesis’s core evaluative claim also applies to other AI systems whose proxies, outputs, and feedback loops shape markets and social outcomes. Sociotechnical mapping makes feedback loops and power visible; choices about proxies and metrics become market-shaping. Chapter 3 started from an invitation to contribute a teaching chapter on AI for real estate academics. Initially a side project, it became a chance to apply complex Responsible AI debates to a domain that touches almost everyone. Real estate provided vivid case studies of how models, markets, and metrics co-construct each other. Chapter 4, The World Values Benchmark The methodological core. The WVB operationalises survey constructs, implements Responsible Prompt Design (RPD) and bias correction, and demonstrates that correcting prompt and anchor artefacts materially changes conclusions. Chapter 4 grew from my internship at Google Research (2021–22). There, I read LLM release papers like a digital archaeologist, uncovering fragile validity claims and brittle proxy-laden benchmarks. With early access to LaMDA and PaLM, I saw firsthand how quickly models changed, and how poorly evaluation kept pace. The result is the WVB: a methodological framework that moves evaluation from prescriptive scores to descriptive, contestable profiles. It sets out the benchmark design, validation logic, and results that support the thesis’s methodological claims. Chapter 5, Semantic Auroras A reflective synthesis. It connects enactivism to participatory realism to explain why measurement makes worlds in generative AI; and why our instruments must be designed accordingly. Here I returned to the bigger picture, drawing together threads of enactivism, participatory realism, and semantic hyperspaces. The chapter adopts a reflective register and draws together the thesis’s philosophical threads around enactivism, participatory
