title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 26
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

rgument is that evaluation is part of how generative AI is understood and governed, and that better instruments can make enacted values easier to see.

Prologue: Catching the Tiger’s Tail 10
KEY CONCEPTS These concepts are defined briefly here for orientation. Fuller development appears in the chapters where they do substantive work. Benchmarking: the practice of assessing system performance against a fixed dataset, task, or metric, often under standardised conditions to enable comparison across models. Benchmarks typically operationalise complex capabilities through simplified proxies and treat performance as a stable, context-independent property. In this thesis, benchmarking is treated as a useful but limited subset of evaluation, one that risks obscuring how behaviour is shaped by prompts, contexts, and sociotechnical conditions. Constructivism (social constructivism): knowledge and values are not discovered but built through social, cultural, and historical contexts. In AI, this aligns with traditions in philosophy of science and philosophy of technology that emphasise how systems are shaped by human practices, norms, and institutions. In this thesis, constructivism helps explain why AI systems cannot be understood outside the social worlds that produce and use them. Cybernetics (loop learning): the study of feedback, control, communication, and adaptation in systems of animals, humans, and machines. Its central insight is that systems do not simply act; they adjust in response to the effects of their own action. In this thesis, cybernetics provides the systems vocabulary for understanding generative AI as recursive rather than static. Single-loop correction adjusts behaviour within a fixed objective. Double-loop reflection questions the assumptions, task framing, or reward structure behind that objective. Triple-loop reflection examines the wider social and institutional values that made those objectives appear natural in the first place. In this thesis, cybernetics grounds MaSH Loops and supports the claim that evaluation is part of the system it studies. Descriptive vs. normative (is vs. ought): a distinction between evaluations that report how models behave and those that prescribe what models should do. The divide traces back to Hume’s is-ought problem and is central in meta-ethics, where attempts to move from description to prescription risk smuggling in hidden normative assumptions. In this thesis, the distinction matters because responsible evaluation should first make model behaviour and embedded assumptions visible before moving to prescription. Enactivism (4E cognition and phenomenology): a relational theory of mind and cognition in which meaning arises through embodied, situated, and interactive activity rather than internal symbol manipulation alone. Associated with Varela, Thompson, and Rosch, enactivism argues that cognition is not the passive representation of a pre-given world but the bringing forth of a meaningful world through ongoing interaction. For AI, this shifts
