title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 31
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ut instead the bringing forth or enacting of a dependent world of relevance in and through embodied action.” Varela, Thompson, The Embodied Mind [407]

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 17
Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI Ethics and Safety through the lenses of Functionalism, Constructivism, and Enactivism. Abstract In 2023, fractures in the Responsible AI community became impossible to ignore. What looked like policy disagreements were rooted in conflicting epistemologies. Functionalist approaches, which dominate AI Safety and benchmarking, treat models as input–output devices whose performance can be scored and compared. Constructivist methods, central to AI Ethics and Sociotechnical Systems (STS), uncover the sociotechnical embedding of systems and the normative assumptions they carry. Both perspectives illuminate important aspects of AI, yet neither fully accounts for the recursive, adaptive nature of today’s generative systems. This chapter argues that a third stance is needed. Enactivism reframes intelligence not as a static property but as relational and participatory. From this perspective, evaluation is less about discovering what a model is and more about observing how it becomes in interaction with humans and institutions. As an early operationalisation of this shift, I introduce MaSH Loops (Machine–Society–Human) as an enactivist evaluation framework that reorients attention from isolated model outputs to recursive sociotechnical interaction. The analysis demonstrates that functionalism and constructivism each miss the recursive character of generative AI, while MaSH Loops provide criteria that better capture situated responsiveness and participatory alignment. This is not a silver bullet but a shift in stance: from static benchmarks to relational measurement. The impact of this chapter is twofold. Conceptually, it establishes the epistemological foundation for the thesis. Practically, it motivates the methodological innovations developed in later chapters, especially the World Values Benchmark, and offers a framework for evaluations that are descriptive, pluralist, and contestable.
