title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 32
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ped in later chapters, especially the World Values Benchmark, and offers a framework for evaluations that are descriptive, pluralist, and contestable.

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 18
1.1 Introduction The Responsible AI community now finds itself caught in a recursive loop—not unlike the ouroboros—where debates about future risk and present harm circle endlessly around divergent values, benchmarks, and epistemic frames. Debate is rife in the Responsible AI community regarding the risks posed by artificial intelligence (AI). Researchers disagree strongly on the strategies to mitigate them. One segment is chiefly concerned with the immediate repercussions of AI on individuals, societies, and vulnerable populations. Their work is deeply entrenched in contextual development and deployment, and the nuances of human bias, drawing heavily from sociotechnical theories. Other researchers are more focussed on existential threats to humanity such as a super-intelligent AI leading to widespread human catastrophe, and challenges to future societies. These two approaches form what are often opposing camps (despite having some over-lapping concerns) resulting in a highly fractured Responsible AI research community in 2023. For the sake of convenience, we will call the first group primarily focussed on immediate impacts the “AI-Ethics community” and the second, those concerned with existential threats, the “AI-Safety community.”[343]. Another moniker, AI-Alignment, which considers how AI might be aligned to human values, sometimes stands as a third camp, or sometimes is categorized as a subset of either AI-Ethics or AI-Safety. As with all nascent scientific and sociological fields, codification, definitions, and standardisation are in significant flux as researchers from numerous fields bring their own methodologies and epistemologies. It is important to note, that even these terms and their applications are hotly contested, since the borders are fluid, and each broad category can be further sub-divided. Collectively, “Responsible AI” researchers are concerned with risks and impacts to human society (present and future), marginalised groups, and the natural environment. Responsible AI researchers may also be concerned with upholding human rights principles and ensuring privacy, fairness, reliability, transparency, contestability, and accountability. Responsible AI researchers come from many disciplines including computer sciences, philosophies, social sciences, law, and economics[343]. They also hail from different and often conflicting political preferences and ideologies[115] and other diverse value systems as well as differing types of workplace environments each with their own cultures and normalisations. The debates between the AI-Ethics and AI-Safety communities are strongly evident on social media platforms such as Twitter/X, at academic conferences, via pre-prints on platforms like arXiv and GitHub, in public wagers between opposing researchers, and across various public media channels. Debate can rapidly escalate to arguments and sometimes culminate in personal and highly public confrontations. The range of contentious issues is broad, spanning from speculations about AI models exhibiting “sparks of general
