title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 33
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

l and highly public confrontations. The range of contentious issues is broad, spanning from speculations about AI models exhibiting “sparks of general

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 19
intelligence” [57], to concerns about systemic toxic bias, reification of prevailing ideologies, environmental impacts, and the challenge of aligning values in a culturally heterogeneous world. In 2022 and 2023, debates over the behaviour and inner constitution of AI systems (e.g. can AI models understand, or reason, or are approaching consciousness) feature in many of the discussions. Closely related is the validity of many evaluation metrics such as those purporting to gauge a model’s commonsense and understanding competencies. Some AI-Ethicists criticise commonsense evaluation benchmarks of conflating the functional capabilities and metaphysical nature of AI models. In 2022, many AI-Safety experts claimed that emerging AI presents a similar danger to humanity as the atomic bomb due to imminent superintelligence as models scale up. These differing epistemologies can result in divergent views of what these new technologies are and the risks they present. Outcomes from AI-Ethics and AI-Safety research foci and methods, each hold the potential to impact current and future human groups in different ways. They can also strongly influence governance and regulatory decisions towards differing primary concerns, causing different financial impacts on the tech sector and downstream industries and people. Governments all over the world are looking to Responsible-AI researchers for guidance. As a result, these heated divisions are no longer just a matter of academic discord, they have significant implications for how we fund AI research, provide access to the latest models, decide on policy, and handle adoption of these new and powerful technologies into our social structures. It would be simplistic to think that the AI-Ethics and AI-Safety divide is fuelled solely by financial interests and competitive drives, though those are contributing factors. Nor is it reasonable or constructive to assume that one camp is less moral or ethical than the other as most Responsible-AI researchers have genuinely good intentions. We need to look more deeply than surface level characterisations and focus on the differing epistemological foundations underpinning each group. This chapter investigates the cognitive differences in how problems are framed, specifically the varying perspectives of constructivism and functionalism. The lens presented here is just one example of how we might frame the Responsible AI discord; it is by no means the only possible way of looking at the issue. However, as science is deeply shaped by the humans involved, it is important to consider how different paradigms can result in varying standpoints of AI researchers. Functionalism and Constructivism offer two contrasting lenses for understanding the nature of intelligence and the methods by which AI should be evaluated. Functionalism emphasises external behaviour and causal roles; arguing that mental states (or AI capabilities) are defined by what they do, not what they’re made of. Constructivism, in contrast, holds that knowledge and meaning are actively constructed through experience, context, and social interaction; implying that AI systems are not merely performing
