title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 34
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

knowledge and meaning are actively constructed through experience, context, and social interaction; implying that AI systems are not merely performing

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 20
functions, but embedded in complex sociotechnical worlds. These divergent foundations help explain the fractures in Responsible AI discourse. This chapter begins by situating Responsible AI research within a socio-historical context, then unpacks the functionalist and constructivist paradigms and how they manifest in two case studies: the artificial general intelligence (AGI) debate and model evaluation practices. It concludes by introducing Enactivism as a third, integrative framework, and proposes MaSH Loops as an actionable framework to evaluate AI systems in a more value pluralistic approach.
1.2 Responsible-AI research as a socially constructed field To understand the current landscape of AI research, we need to see that its foundations are rooted not only in algorithms and computation but also in social, cultural, political, and philosophical contexts. We are shaped by environmental and institutional influences that affect how we approach problems and how we perceive technological artefacts. Those influences, in turn, shape experimental design and the interpretation of results. Science, being a fundamentally human endeavour, is just as deeply intertwined with cultural and individual normative assumptions and larger structural forces [see 126, 161, 213, 218, 312 for a selection of seminal works]. Unfortunately, this constructivist perspective on how scientific fields are socially constructed is still not taught as often as it should be in many natural science, computer science, and engineering programmes. Without exposure to these ideas, a lot of AI research grounded in more technical disciplines, displays a strong propensity towards functionalist methodologies at the expense of constructivist insights. History gives a clear view of how AI was socially constructed and how functionalist and constructivist tendencies emerged within it. One pivotal moment was the 1956 Dartmouth conference, attended by a relatively small group of white men trained in mathematics, computer science, and cybernetics. Most were connected to elite US universities, research institutes, and government networks, which likely narrowed the range of worldviews represented there. The conference also, for better or worse, coined the term Artificial Intelligence [252] despite even Minsky noting that “we don’t usually name fields for their aspirations, but for their subject matter or their function” [361, Ch.9]. The Dartmouth conference was a defining moment in the history of AI, and the discussions held there continue to have a significant impact on AI development. A predominant belief among the attendees was that applications of computational models of the mind, including self-awareness, emotion, and free will, were achievable goals for AI [251, 252, 266]. The Dartmouth focus on ideas that mental states can be understood and emulated based on their functions and behaviours rather than their underlying biologic or intrinsic essence still influences many AI researchers today. Organiser of the conference,
