title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 35
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ons and behaviours rather than their underlying biologic or intrinsic essence still influences many AI researchers today. Organiser of the conference,

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 21
McCarthy noted to a colleague “we shall concentrate on a problem of devising a way of programming a calculator to form concepts and to form generalizations” [207], a strong indicator of the focus on computationalism. It is important to note that many of the Dartmouth attendees had also been participants in earlier Cybernetics workshops, most notably the Macy Conferences of 1946-1953 [207]. Cybernetics, the study of systems, feedback, and control in animals and machines [420], played a pivotal role in AI's early evolution. As with most nascent fields, particularly those that are highly interdisciplinary, there were divisions and differences amongst scholars of how cybernetics should be approached. There is no single moment we can point to as defining the split and there are many opinions of how to define the split [207, 400], but it is clear that some researchers pursued a more mechanical-focus as exemplified by computationalism and some worked with more constructivist style approaches such as exemplified by autopoiesis (self-sustaining and replicating systems) and applications to the social sciences. Most of the cyberneticians at the Dartmouth conference showed strong mechanical and functionalist approaches in their writings. McCulloch and Pitts [254] had developed the computability of neural networks. Newell and Simon [281] developed the logic theory machine laying the groundwork for the world’s first computer programs. Solomonoff [365] went on to develop the theory of algorithmic probability. And, Shannon [357] developed a mathematical theory of communication that could be applied to machines (it is important to note that Shannon’s later cybernetic opinions shifted to a more constructivist approach). The work of many of these mechanical cyberneticians became the foundation for symbolic AI (or as it was later known, Good Old Fashioned AI). Some of the cyberneticians that split from these functionalist leanings contributed to the development of a parallel field that can loosely be called second-order cybernetics. This alternative approach took a more constructivist stance as exemplified in the works of Von Foerster [411] on the construction of reality and shaping of communication; Mead’s [258] cybernetic explanations of anthropological processes; and Maturana and Varela’s [249] autopoietic systems. By the latter half of the 20th Century, while some functionalist leaning, mechanical cyberneticians aimed to craft symbolic AI systems underpinned by computational paradigms, others [i.e. 300, 302, 307], accentuated the relational dynamics intrinsic to systems, resulting in emergent phenomena applying these ideas to AI, education, and cognitive sciences. Though AI hardware development, philosophy, and cybernetics were all closely tied in the mid-20th century, the functionalist/constructivist split has only grown wider in the 21st century. Of course, numerous philosophical lenses can dissect cognitive processes, problem-solving mechanisms, epistemology, and innovation. While functionalist versus constructivist perspectives provide one such lens, there are other dichotomies like
