title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 37
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

tions rather than “comprehend”. This alignment is evident when comparing the constructivist perspective of knowledge stemming from interactions to the

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 23
connectionist models, which derive pattern recognition abilities from numerous units processing data collaboratively. After decades of the dominance of symbolic AI, we now know that connectionism was a missing piece of the puzzle to Deep Learning which powers most of the AI we are now arguing about. As we move into the next learning loop of AI technologies, it is surprising then, how polarised many researchers still are in strong tendencies toward functionalism with minimal constructivist considerations. The constructivist approaches of some AI-Ethics scholars, particularly those calling for greater sociotechnical and contextual considerations could be seen as contributing to righting the listing ship of Responsible-AI development
1.4 Constructivism and functionalism In a branch of philosophy called Philosophy of Mind, functionalism asserts that the way a thing behaves, the way it functions, determines what a thing is[129, 317]. Functionalism is a materialist theory of mind that uses causal relationships between inputs and outputs or actions to determine the internal mental states of the object of study [42, 225, 335] In this paradigm, a function is caused by something else, such as a sensory input or another mental state: slamming your finger in the door causes the state known as “pain” to tell you to get your finger out of the door! The functionalist view of the mind is that it is an intricate piece of machinery in which every mental state has a role to play in the overall system. The functionalist perspective is that if you observe some kind of behaviour, you can make inferences about the nature of the system: that machine is functioning in the same way as an intelligent human, therefore it must be intelligent [32, 398]. A functionalist approach may posit that an AI's behaviour is best interpreted via its operations and observable inputs and outputs. Functionalist paradigms in AI revolve around rules, logical sequences, and causal relationships; though some researchers such as Vallor [403] critique these approaches for neglecting the moral and contextual dimensions of technological practice. Social norms, values, and ethics are all things that exist in society that an entity can absorb and replicate by AI systems to produce appropriate behaviour. Constructivism, on the other hand, holds that a mind doesn’t just receive external inputs but that experiences, both past and present, actively combine to construct knowledge or learning. Constructivism holds that understanding and knowledge systems are constructed, shaped by individual and collective experiences rather than being passively received or innate. Therefore, the way a thing behaves is the emergent result of many internal and external forces coming together. Social norms and values are constructed when people interact, bringing their own experiences and worldviews to the process. A constructivist viewpoint might contend that our grasp of AI is profoundly
