title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 39
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

consider that psychological states are characterised “according to what they do, by their relations to stimulus inputs and behavioural outputs” [311].

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 25
Table 1: Examples of functionalist style evaluations of AI models. Assessment type Description Potential limitations Task-specific Performance Metrics Metrics like accuracy of classifications and language translation scores, provide quantitative measures of how well the model achieves a specific goal set by the evaluation designer.
Can miss important nuances. Consider AI tools used to attempt to recognise generated texts to prevent students from cheating. These tools have often been found to be unreliable and biased against English-As-Second-Language students [417]. These types of errors can lead to some students being unfairly graded. Input-Output Mapping Models can be viewed as black boxes that take a specific input and produce an output. These evaluations focus on the relationship between what goes into the model and what comes out as a descriptor of the system without investigating internal processes
This method can result in a limited understanding of the complex causal relationships occurring in the model. Consider when a model is evaluated on popular human tests, like college entrance exams, there are times when the answers may exist in the training data and therefore the evaluation method isn’t testing a model’s actual competence [189]. This type of issue can lead to overfitting or poor adaptation to new contexts. Transfer Learning Evaluates the model’s capability to apply knowledge from one domain to another creating a quantifiable metric for adaptability.
A model's adaptability across diﬀerent tasks doesn't necessarily validate the soundness of the adaptation and can lead to measurement errors. Consider when health data from a wealthy country is used to train a medical diagnosis AI that is subsequently used in a diﬀerent context in a lower socio-economic region. The transfer of “learned” medical patterns is often inappropriate and can harm or further marginalize disadvantaged groups [68]. Functionalism is strongly related to Behaviouralism: the way an entity or artefact behaves or functions, indicates what is happening under the hood [71]. This viewpoint considers different physical instances be viewed as comparable, provided they perform analogous functions. Instances may include artificial neural networks (ANNs) as analogous to neuronal networks in human brains. It provides a flexible framework in AI research, suggesting that if an artificial system performs a function like a human, it can be inferred to have replicated the same cognitive process. Functionalism (in the context of AI) is highly dependent on the assumed validity of computational theories of mind such as Computationalism [254, 317, 308, 89], centring on the idea that cognitive states are characterised more by their roles or functions than their intrinsic qualities. The Turing test is perhaps the most well-known application of functionalism to machines. Encoded into the test is Turing’s assumption that if a machine could sufficiently fool a user into thinking they were conversing with a “man pretending to be a woman” rather than a “machine pretending to be a woman,” then that machine could
