title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 40
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ser into thinking they were conversing with a “man pretending to be a woman” rather than a “machine pretending to be a woman,” then that machine could

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 26
be said to possess the capability to think [398]. A functionalist perspective of AI considers that the mimicking of human-like functions signifies the presence of intelligence, thinking, or understanding. Functionalist approaches can provide useful methods for evaluating AI systems. By focusing on the tasks a model can successfully perform, developers can more rapidly prototype, test, report on capabilities, compare with competitor models, and iterate on new models. Functionalist assessments of a model focus on the output aligning with the task and the expected measure of success. This orientation towards outcomes rather than intricate internal processes facilitates faster advancements and application-driven results. Moreover, the functionalist perspective allows for diverse implementations across various platforms and technologies, promoting efficiency of development as a field. Functionalist perspectives can dominate AI-Safety dialogues, particularly when making linear outcome predictions. An example would be arguments that generative AI models have some understanding or intelligence, based on them being able to pass human tests such as legal bar and college entrance exams and various mathematical challenges. See Table 1 for a few examples of functionalist style evaluations. A functionalist perspective can contribute valuable insights that are useful for policymakers and easily identify regulation adherence or missteps with a focus on mitigating harms and risks espoused by prescriptive ethical guardrails. Such an objective lens assists with providing a pragmatic framework for AI governance that is more risk-centric and can more easily take advantage of existing laws and policies. While functionalist accounts of AGI often lean on behavioural equivalence; suggesting that if a machine behaves like a human, it may be considered intelligent or even sentient. This position has come under increasing scrutiny. Hipólito et al. [172] challenge such assumptions by offering a falsifiable framework for minimal sentience based not on imitation, but on structural and relational criteria: active self-maintenance, historical adaptability, and autonomous agency. According to their view, current AI systems, including LLMs, may appear fluent but fail to meet these core conditions. Their contribution shifts the conversation away from imitation-based benchmarks toward more biologically and ethically grounded criteria for assessing AI agency.
