title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 42
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

of reading, in this chapter, we will use the original term Constructivism but acknowledge the huge body of published work separating the two concepts.

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 28
highlight the constructed relationships between humans and AI when they pose The Participation Game as a 21st century update to Turing’s Imitation Game, exploring how generative AI and humans can join in social construction processes of language as representations of reality. How symbols and images are connected to knowledge schemas and abstract concepts in generative AI is an identified problem [246] and active area of research in 2023 and is emblematic of constructivist viewpoints. Many scientists employ, or argue for, constructivist approaches to these problems [i.e., 157, 195] More broadly, constructivism as a metaethical stance leaves significant room for further work on pluralist AI alignment. Translating the constructivist idea that knowledge is shaped by an agent's interactions with their environment, to an AI model embedded in sociotechnical human systems, a constructivist approach would view AI as an extension of humans: learning and evolving in tandem with human agents from human-machine interactions. The goal of constructivist grounded AI systems is to produce models and evaluations that are context-sensitive to human social structures, communication patterns, and aligned to appropriate human values (however defined). To make this more concrete, constructivist approaches to AI evaluation tend to operationalise these ideas through specific design choices in both models and benchmarks. These include attention to how prompts frame tasks, how training data encodes cultural assumptions, and how evaluation protocols interpret outputs in context rather than as isolated responses. Rather than treating evaluation as a neutral measurement of fixed capability, these approaches treat it as a situated practice that reflects and reinforces particular epistemic and social commitments. Table 2 summarises key examples of how constructivist principles are instantiated in contemporary AI systems and evaluation frameworks. Through this perspective, an AI model's learning is intricately tied to human engagement. The role of human influence in AI learning is often highlighted in AI-Ethics, particularly regarding the stereotypes and biases encoded in the vast training datasets required to develop generative AI (GenAI) models. For example, in 2021 most large language models were trained on predominantly English texts resulting in biases toward western and US-centric normative views and ethics [192].
