title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 44
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ently constructivist endeavour. It requires a holistic view of the model's genesis and evolution as well as acknowledgment of the subjective inputs at

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 30
each stage of AI development. As the AI-ethics community generally underscores the impact of AI on humans as resulting from the interplay of AI's design, and contextual deployment, we can consider that group to generally tilt toward constructivist perspectives.
1.4.3 Two sides of one coin Importantly, functionalist and constructivist perspectives are not mutually exclusive. They are merely different viewpoints or lenses for seeing and interpreting the world; it is possible to hold functionalist and constructivist views concurrently. Differences emerge from decisions regarding when, where, and how we choose to employ these frameworks; choices that can deeply impact our ethical assessment of AI. Though this dichotomous framing of functionalism and constructivism in Responsible-AI research doesn't capture the entire spectrum of perspectives, it provides a perspicacious categorisation for one of the underlying differences in Responsible-AI debates. The division should not be seen as a strong polarization of approaches, rather a nuanced framework to better illuminate different ways of understanding AI models amongst various communities.
1.5 Manifestations of functionalist and constructivist debates in Responsible-AI Below are two case studies of how the functionalist/constructivist split in AI research is manifest. My intent in doing so is not to defend one side or the other but to illustrate different ways that one can approach and make sense of these trending debates in Responsible-AI research.
1.5.1 The AGI and existential risk debates The debate over AGI's impossibility, potential, or imminence is intense within Responsible-AI circles, focusing on existential risks from superintelligent AI, possibly possessing consciousness. AGI is often associated with discussions of consciousness and sentience. Some researchers consider self-awareness a necessary component of AGI [216, 138, 150]. Some see higher level cognitive reasoning as a requisite for AGI with a type of computational consciousness [33]. Others consider machine consciousness (at least in the foreseeable future) is either out of the question or completely unprovable [17, 333]. Despite the arguments that we are limited in what we can say about even human consciousness, AGI advocates assert that artificial consciousness is so obviously on the imminent horizon (with superintelligence and singularities in tow) that we must address the long-term existential risk to our species right now [34, 334].
