title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 45
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

nent horizon (with superintelligence and singularities in tow) that we must address the long-term existential risk to our species right now [34, 334].

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 31
Functionalist perspectives assess roles of consciousness and develop tests to evaluate AI against these benchmarks, typically using human behaviour as a standard (excluding other intelligent animal behaviours). They prioritise observable outcomes over subjective experiences like perception or emotion. Whilst the definition lines between AGI, superintelligence, and artificial consciousness are fluid, there is no doubt that all these are strongly related to concerns about existential risk from potential malevolent or non-human aligned AGIs. Concerns which had been popularized by Stephen Hawking [165] and Nick Bostrom [50] and are frequent concerns amongst some AI-Safety researchers. A few researchers say they are certain some GenAI systems are already conscious such as former Google engineer Blake Lemoine [222]. Or that “it may be that today's large neural networks are slightly conscious” as tweeted by OpenAI co-founder Ilya Sutskever [377]. Or they’re not there yet but are close, as per former Google Researcher Geoffrey Hinton [206] and researchers from the Future of Humanity Institute at Oxford [61]. In discussing the risks of AGI, Bengio et al. [35] argue that the technology is fast surpassing human capabilities and poses societal-scale risks particularly in the case of rogue autonomous agents. Those concerned with impending AGI are emblematised by the OpenAI mission statement “To ensure that AGI benefits all of humanity”; a statement which became the centre of their board meltdown in late November 2023 [37]. Most AI-Ethicists say AGI concerns are dangerous diversions from more pressing risks on current social groups. For instance, Rooij et al., [333] argue that current AI systems are far from achieving human-level cognition and are instead “decoys” offering distorted images of human cognition. On the ability of AI models to “understand” language, Browning and LeCunn [54] emphatically state “A system trained on language alone will never approximate human intelligence, even if trained from now until the heat death of the universe” (para.24). Mitchell & Krakauer [269] argue that as AI models lack internal mental states they can never “understand” anything. All constructivist style arguments that firmly oppose the idea that an artefacts behaviour indicates mental models and understanding. Our lack of understanding of even biological consciousness has an important influence on these debates. In the essay “What is it like to be a bat?” Thomas Nagel [275] underscored the challenge of truly understanding conscious experience—the "what it's like" aspect inherent to every conscious being—as being outside of our own realm. Using bats as an example, Nagel argues that even if we understand the biological and neurological functions of bats, we can never truly access or comprehend their unique, subjective experience of the world. As such, Nagel challenges the adequacy of functionalist and reductionist explanations of consciousness. Similarly, the question of "what it is like to be an AI," or if indeed there is not anything it is like to be an AI, presents just as many challenges. A constructivist approach doesn't rule out AGI's potential for artificial consciousness [70]. However, to align with constructivism, factors such as interactive
