title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 46
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

tivist approach doesn't rule out AGI's potential for artificial consciousness [70]. However, to align with constructivism, factors such as interactive

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 32
emergence, contextual savvy, embodied experiences, distinctive development, and adaptability must be considered. Many constructivist theories, like phenomenology and subjectivism, demand evidence of qualitative experience or 'quale' in AI, a challenging proof given current research limitations. While both functionalist and constructivist lenses offer valuable insights into the issue of consciousness, they lead to fundamentally different understandings and implications about the nature of AI, akin to the diverse interpretations of the subjective experiences of bats. In 2023, prominent AI-Safety advocates circulated public letters calling for a “pause” in AI research due to concerns of superintelligence, sometimes comparing AI to a level of risk on par with pandemics and nuclear war [62, 137], and thousands of researchers signed-on. These open letters have become colloquially known as The Pause letters. Detractors (and there were many) accused notable signatories of trying to “moat out” their competitors for financial gain [303], or argued that signatories (sometimes called X-riskers or Doomers by some AI-Ethics researchers) were ignoring pressing humanitarian and environmental harms [30, 144]. Other researchers noted that some of the primary signatories to the Pause letters were the same people who had the power to actually enact a pause in that they were CEOs and executives of the development companies [i.e., Whittaker as quoted by 265]. Bryson argued the Center for AI Safety (CAIS) letter was “openly regulatory interference”[55] and numerous other AI-Ethics researchers expressed outrage at the Pause letters [343]. An Editorial piece in Nature in June stated that many of the AI ethicists the authors had spoken to were frustrated by the doomsday rhetoric dominating debates, which they feared was improving the fiscal advantage of tech firms and weakening regulatory efforts [277]. Virtually all critics of the Pause letters expressed concerns that these letters failed to adequately address current sociotechnical issues of AI. In short, the AI-Ethics community felt that the AI-Safety community was failing to consider the constructed aspects of the problem and was focusing too myopically on functionally defined long-term projections. In the later part of 2022, a survey of 327 respondents from the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), indicated that the majority of those surveyed believed that AGI is concerning (58%) and incoming (57%), and some agreed that catastrophic risk on the level of nuclear war is a plausible consequence (36%) [116]. However, 67% of the respondents identified as men and only 25% as women and 58% hailed from the US (the next highest representation being Europe at 11%) indicating significant leanings in the demographics. A report published by the effective altruist (EA) group Rethink on the attitudes of 2407 paid online US-based respondents indicated respondents predominantly (59%) supported the Pause letters [116]. However, the demographic data was not released with the report. Media headlines citing this report were well circulated and performed functionally to gasoline on a bonfire. The EA movement is often associated with the AI-
