title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 47
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

eadlines citing this report were well circulated and performed functionally to gasoline on a bonfire. The EA movement is often associated with the AI-

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 33
Safety community [240, 143, 148, 248] and seeks to ensure resources to assist humans are used to maximum effect in a utilitarianist framework. The EA approach to AI-safety reflects their larger philosophy: optimizing outcomes with evidence-based tactics, prioritizing AI's ability to minimize risks and enhance benefits. This functionalist view equates ethical actions and decisions to the results of clear, targeted systems. However, many AI Ethicists argue this perspective overemphasizes measurable data, neglecting broader ethical principles like virtue ethics and diverse metaethical concepts. The AGI debate is not purely academic. Papers and analyses from both sides not only impact media narratives and public perceptions of the ethical safety of these technologies but also governance and policy making decisions [e.g. 12, 393]. Understanding the core differences in this debate helps us see how those more concerned with AGI risks diverge from the priorities of AI-Ethicists in their approaches to Responsible-AI and thus their advice and recommendations to media, government, and industry.
1.5.2 Evaluations of AI models Responsible-AI researcher differences also pertain to methodologies around evaluation processes of AI models. A key driver is differences in approaches to measurement validity between the social sciences and computer sciences [188]. In social sciences there is a strong emphasis on construct validity: whether measurement tools, such as surveys and tests, genuinely encapsulate the abstract concepts (i.e., intelligence, understanding, reasoning, or morals) they claim to measure. Social scientists go to great lengths to ensure their instruments are not confounded by elements such as participant bias, social desirability, or other situational or contextual factors [23]. Throughout the data collection process, a social scientist is tasked with repeatedly self-reflecting on the question: is this instrument capturing the intended essence or construct that I want to measure? In computer science, validity often takes a different emphasis focusing on whether algorithms or models genuinely adhere to their pre-defined metrics without being tainted by external factors or noise. Chief concerns are robustness and reproducibility. A computer scientist will take care to mitigate hardware inconsistencies, varying input, data quality, and other factors. Yet, more frequently these days computer scientists are building on these epistemic frameworks to measure GenAI models for unobservable theoretic concepts. These computer science designed evaluation tests are operationalised via a measurement model more suited to observable and easily quantifiable metrics such as how many questions did a model answer correctly on a human-oriented exam [188, 320]. Such misalignments in linking metrics to mechanisms and creating inaccurate measures for abstract concepts such as ethics and morals can cause harmful social and individual impacts [181, 230, 354].
