title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 48
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

isms and creating inaccurate measures for abstract concepts such as ethics and morals can cause harmful social and individual impacts [181, 230, 354].

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 34
The social science approach to measurement validity of an abstract construct is fundamentally more constructivist in nature and the computer science approach is obviously more functionalist. The underlying issues in measurement validity and reliability remain consistent for both computer and social sciences. Yet researchers from those two fields may not consider their measurement methodological differences when discussing how to implement or manage Responsible-AI efforts resulting in the potential for misunderstandings between groups. Both methods, however, can be highly useful to the field of Responsible-AI when used in contextually appropriate ways. To explore these differences let’s consider a popular (and contested) suite of AI evaluation benchmarks. called Commonsense Reasoning, canonically exemplified by the Winograd-Schema Challenge (WSC) [224]. Benchmarks aimed at evaluating a model's capability to exhibit commonsense reasoning are cited in virtually every accompanying release paper or technical report when a new GenAI model comes out. If we examine the original WCS (for simplicity), we see the test purports to measure the abstract concept of commonsense reasoning by presenting AI models with sentence pairs where a pronoun's reference is ambiguous. Perhaps the most well-known example is: 1. “The trophy doesn’t fit in the suitcase because it’s too large.” 2. “The trophy doesn’t fit in the suitcase because it’s too small.” The pronoun "it" in each sentence has a different referent. While this might seem straightforward to a human, many AI models struggled with these puzzles for years. The broad assumption of the testing instrument was that the more of these puzzles the model got right, the more likely there was some “reasoning” going on under the hood. This highly functionalist approach to measuring the theoretical concept of reasoning has led some researchers to subsequently claim behaviour of advanced GenAI models as indicative of sparks of AGI; and others to contest this measurement assumption [e.g., 73, 270]. One of the most controversial papers of 2023 was Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early Experiments with GPT-4 [57] written primarily by researchers at Microsoft. The “Sparks Paper” argued that the GPT-4 model had attained “a form of general intelligence, indeed showing sparks of artificial general intelligence.” [57, p.92] The authors based their claim on evaluations of what they asserted to be core mental capabilities including math puzzles, reasoning, deduction, expert levels of knowledge, and playing games. The evaluation methods described in the Sparks paper can be considered examples of functionalist thinking; that is, the evaluations depended on functional outputs of the model aligning with expected human outputs on the same tests. Where the humans and machines results aligned it was inferred that it is likely that something similar is going on in GPT4 as human brains.
