title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 49
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ame tests. Where the humans and machines results aligned it was inferred that it is likely that something similar is going on in GPT4 as human brains.

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 35
The Sparks paper received significant media coverage; as well as widespread criticism from AI-Ethicists. A response by Stanford researchers, Are Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models a Mirage? argued that “emergent abilities appear due to the researcher's choice of metric rather than due to fundamental changes in model behaviour with scale” [349, p.1]. Another paper argued that the emergent abilities cited in the Sparks paper were due to in-context learning from the training data [237]. Another set of researchers [243] highlighted what they saw as a fundamental flaw in the logic whereby the fallacy of the functionalist language-thought relationship (characterised in the Turing test) that posits entities good at language possesses reasoning capabilities. They advocated for a better distinction in the AI community between formal and functional language competencies arguing that GenAI models are “good models of language but incomplete models of human thought [243, p.1] There is a growing plethora of commonsense or reasoning evaluation benchmarks for GenAI, far too many to list here. Some notable ones include: HellaSwag [429], SuperGLUE [414], Unicorn on Rainbow [236], and BIG-bench [366]. Commonsense benchmarks are usually functionalist in design as well as prescriptive in that there is a defined target metric of ‘success’ may reflect the designer’s normative assumptions. These and other evaluation design considerations have drawn heavy criticism from the AI-Ethics community [103, 350, 208, 51, 229, 245] particularly in regard to the measurement validity of what the benchmarks are claiming to report on. Significantly, one of the original designers of the WSC, Ernest Davis [98], has also hit back at the validity of commonsense benchmarks: “More than one hundred benchmarks have been developed to test the commonsense knowledge and commonsense reasoning abilities of artificial intelligence (AI) systems. However, these benchmarks are often flawed and many aspects of commonsense remain untested. Consequently, we do not currently have any reliable way of measuring to what extent existing AI systems have achieved these abilities” [98]. Another important consideration in this style of benchmark is who’s commonsense is being included/excluded [192]. Consider the benchmark The ETHICS dataset that seeks to evaluate LLMs on their moral judgements [168] which relies on calibration of the moral judgements on public contributions to a sub-Reddit called “Am I the Asshole” [168]. This begs the question, who’s morals are being represented in that sub-Reddit forum and are they contextually appropriate for measuring an AI model’s ethical behaviours? Other pitfalls for popular functionalist-style benchmarks include: 1. Cultural Bias and Context: Prescriptive benchmarks often reflect the cultural, historical, and social norms of the groups designing them. Consequently, they might inadvertently prioritise a specific cultural viewpoint, sidelining others.
