title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 50
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

al, and social norms of the groups designing them. Consequently, they might inadvertently prioritise a specific cultural viewpoint, sidelining others.

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 36
2. Overemphasis on Surface-Level Knowledge: While some benchmarks gauge a model's ability to reproduce commonsense knowledge, they might fail to evaluate ethical considerations beyond deontological and utilitarianist moral frameworks, such as virtue ethics and non-normative ethics like moral value pluralism. For example, sentence or question that appears neutral or factual in one culture might be contentious or sensitive in another. 3. Lack of Ethical and Emotional Nuance: Binary evaluations prominent in computer science may miss out on the grey areas that social sciences prioritise. Consider moral dilemmas (cue, the Trolley Problem), emotionally charged scenarios (medically assisted suicides), or other scenarios where the right choice is unclear to all (i.e. how to manage the Covid-19 pandemic). While an AI might technically exhibit successful outputs defined by the evaluation designer, it might lack sensitivity or contextually appropriate nuance. Functionalist approaches to evaluation benchmarks seek to design precise benchmarks for evaluating models that rely on prescriptive design processes. However, these benchmarks can inadvertently oversimplify the complexities of human experience and understanding. On the other hand, constructivist approaches, or descriptive evaluations, while emphasising the importance of capturing the essence of abstract constructs, can sometimes fall into the pitfalls of overcomplexity. Since constructivism attempts to encapsulate a broad spectrum of human emotions, cultures, and beliefs, constructivist approaches can occasionally become ambiguous and difficult to standardise. If we were able to foster more cross-collaborative benchmark designs between computer scientists, social scientists, and many other disciplines, there is little doubt we would likely end up with more robust benchmarks and could develop some standardisation across the industry that remains ethically sensitive to a plurality of human experiences. While both Functionalism and Constructivism have provided valuable philosophical lenses for interpreting AI behaviour and guiding early evaluation methods, they increasingly struggle to accommodate the recursive, autonomous, and context-sensitive nature of modern AI systems. As systems grow more multimodal, generative, and agentic, the limitations of output-based assessments and social constructivist critiques become more apparent. These frameworks were not designed to account for systems that learn, adapt, and participate within dynamically unfolding environments. In what follows, I introduce Enactivism, a relational, embodied, and process-oriented paradigm that synthesises elements of both traditions while offering a more responsive approach to the ethical and epistemological challenges of Responsible AI.
