title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 52
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

activist concepts have been applied to various endeavours in robotics and GenAI both to advance development and to understand what they are doing on a

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 38
deeper level [7, 133, 348]. Enactivism agrees with embodiment approaches but builds on that by including agency and autonomy [105, 348] making it a more suitable tool for understanding multimodal systems and autonomous agents. There are also some initial steps toward using enactivism to address AI-alignment, such as attempting to use the concepts to make AI ontologically more similar to humans [64]. This approach overlaps with functionalism in recognizing that external structures and tools are not just facilitators but integral components of cognitive systems. Where enactivism does diverge from constructivist views is in its emphasis on the embodiment and situatedness of cognition. In essence, while all enactivist approaches can be considered constructivist in nature, not all constructivist approaches are enactivist. Therefore, enactivism can be seen as a particular embodiment of constructivist principles, with a distinct focus on the active role of the body and its environment.
1.6.2 Historical and Philosophical Foundations The philosophical roots of Enactivism lie deeply embedded in phenomenology and second-order cybernetics. Francisco Varela, Evan Thompson, and Eleanor Rosch introduced the term in "The Embodied Mind" [407], highlighting cognition as an embodied and relational phenomenon. Central to their framework is the concept of autopoiesis: self-organising systems continually regenerating and maintaining themselves through interactions with their environment. Andy Clark and David Chalmers further extended Enactivism through their "Extended Mind" hypothesis, which proposes that cognition is not confined to the individual mind but extends into environmental artefacts and interactions [85]. While both Enactivism and the Extended Mind hypothesis reject internalist accounts of cognition, Enactivism places greater emphasis on lived interaction and the continuity of sense-making over time, rather than the functional distribution of mental processes across tools. Together, these theories have fundamentally reshaped understandings of cognitive processes, laying foundations for contemporary applications of Enactivism in AI research, particularly in the analysis of emergent agency and relational autonomy.
1.6.3 Affordances and Relational Cognition Central to understanding Enactivism’s contribution to Responsible AI is the concept of affordances, first introduced by Gibson [147] and subsequently refined in ecological psychology. Affordances describe actionable opportunities provided by an environment to an agent, depending on the agent’s capabilities and intentions. For example, a chair affords sitting to a human but climbing to a toddler.
