title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 53
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ironment to an agent, depending on the agent’s capabilities and intentions. For example, a chair affords sitting to a human but climbing to a toddler.

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 39
Affordances help operationalise Enactivism by bridging the gap between Functionalism’s focus on computational outputs and Constructivism’s emphasis on socially situated interactions. In practical terms, this means affordances show how intelligent behaviour is not just something computed internally or socially constructed after the fact, but something enacted in real-time through the ongoing negotiation between an agent and its world. In Responsible AI contexts, affordances are crucial for evaluating not just what a system can do, but how it interprets and engages with its operational environment in real time. Consider, for instance, an autonomous vehicle navigating a complex urban environment. Such a vehicle dynamically perceives affordances like stopping for pedestrians, accelerating safely through intersections, or adjusting trajectories around road hazards. Similarly, an autonomous generative agent in a virtual environment identifies affordances for interaction (such as conversing with simulated users, avoiding conflict scenarios, or initiating cooperative tasks) based on context and relational dynamics rather than pre-programmed instructions alone. Even large language models (LLMs) benefit from an affordance perspective, where the effectiveness of their responses depends on dynamically assessing conversational context, user intent, and cultural norms rather than merely replicating patterns from training data. Affordances reveal how Enactivism operationalises cognition as adaptive and relational, grounded in context rather than static design.
1.6.4 Enactivism Applied to AI Functionalism and constructivism are increasingly insufficient in themselves to address the ethical and safety challenges of advanced AI systems like multimodal and MoE models, and multimodal stacks leveraging a variety of AI technologies. Models with the capacity to process and generate text, image, and sound, add layers of complexity to Responsible-AI practices that likely can’t be addressed by either functionalism or constructivism alone. Additionally, the rise of autonomous generative agents [301, 415], poised to become a dominant AI trend, amplifies these challenges by introducing artificial agents or collections of multi-agent systems (MAS) into constructed environments that may interact with human users, or in the case of robotics with the physical world. Generative agents open large areas of potential ethical risks, particularly as there has already been suggestions from some researchers that this technology be used as stand-ins for humans in evaluations of GenAI models [231] and as a proxy for experimenting with human behaviour in social science research [109, 156]. As AI systems grow more complex, adaptive, autonomous, and embedded in physical environments a purely functionalist or constructivist viewpoint may overlook critical ethical
