title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 56
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

s far from settled. Recently, the culmination of a 25-year bet that we would identify the biological mechanism for human consciousness by 2023, struck

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 42
between Chalmers and neuroscientist Christof Koch, concluded in favour of Chalmers—that is, we still don’t know [177]. Koch conceded defeat despite pining hopes on recent technological advances used to address the problem such as fMRI, optogenetics, and other computational theories. Those theories include Integrated Information Theory (IIT) [9, 390] that considers consciousness to be a causal property grounded in physical objective structures (at the back of the brain). Also, Global Workspace Theory (GWT) [21, 223] which posits a mental workspace (at the front of the brain) that is the site of whatever requires attention in the moment. Both IIT and GWT have been applied to the question of AI consciousness [i.e. 45, 158]. Whilst research is active in these areas, no proofs have arisen; it is also important to note both theories have also been strongly criticised by many [i.e. 16, 353]. In contrast to these functional approaches we are also witnessing the development of newer, constructivist-style, models of cognition and self-experience such as the afore-mentioned 4E framework, which includes four cognitive phenomena: embodied, embedded, extended, and enacted [262]. The 4E framework is originated amongst connectionists, psychologists, and phenomenologists and includes the work of neuroscientists, philosophers, linguists, and roboticists [358]. In brief, this framework looks at the emergence of consciousness and self-awareness through an interplay between the body and its interactions with the environment. The approach doesn’t exclude computational processes, it indicates that those processes alone are insufficient for high level cognitive mechanisms and consciousness. Both 4E and previously mentioned IIT challenge internalist or representational views (for example, computationalism); however, there are important differences. IIT is more focussed on internal structures whilst 4E highlights the importance of interaction with the external world (the enactivism discussed earlier). 4E is rooted in phenomenology and dynamical systems theory whilst IIT is grounded in information theory; and, 4E has a broader abstraction boundary extending cognition into the environment which is more aligned with sociotechnical theories of AI impacts on society. In short, whilst IIT doesn’t exclude constructivist processes, it does have some functionalist aspects such as the proposed quantifiable measure (phi F) that attempts to gauge the level of consciousness in a system based on its degree of integrated information. If we return to our AGI case study for a moment, we find newer cognitive paradigms of 4E and enactivism look at the emergence of consciousness and self-awareness through an interplay between the body, its interactions with the environment, and the capacity to enact agentic volition [262, 358] and may provide some new insights into an old debate. The 4E approach does not exclude computational processes, it simply indicates that those processes alone are insufficient for high level cognitive mechanisms required for true AGI [394]. Triguero et al, [394] posit that we take a step toward AGI via general purpose AI (GPAI)
