title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 58
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ontext-sensitive view of intelligence aligns strongly with the framework proposed by Hipólito et al. (2024), who argue that minimal sentience requires

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 44
three testable conditions: active self-maintenance, historical adaptability, and autonomous agency. Their checklist offers an operational extension of enactivist values, grounding evaluation not in surface-level behaviour, but in the system’s ability to sustain itself, adapt over time, and act independently in response to changing contexts. Taken together, these perspectives suggest that evaluation must itself be reconceived. Rather than relying exclusively on benchmarks that test static input-output mappings, Responsible AI evaluation should ask questions of relational capacity: • Does this system engage meaningfully with its environment? • Can it respond adaptively to unforeseen changes? • Does it co-participate in the ethical and social contexts it operates within?
1.6.7 MaSH Loops as Enactivist Evaluation Frameworks To make enactivist principles actionable in Responsible AI, I propose Machine–Society–Human (MaSH) Loops. While MaSH Loops is grounded in enactivism, it also draws on cybernetic thinking by treating evaluation as a recursive feedback process in which machine, social, and human dynamics continuously reshape one another. MaSH Loops is an enactivist evaluation framework that treats AI systems not as isolated tools or single human-in-the-loop pipelines, but as recursive couplings among machine, social, and human processes. This shifts evaluation away from isolated outputs and toward the recursive conditions under which model behaviour is produced, interpreted, and taken up across machine, social, and human contexts. In MaSH Loops, these domains are treated as mutually conditioning rather than separable: machines are shaped by training data, interfaces, and optimisation regimes; society by institutions, norms, and collective practices; and humans by interpretation, uptake, and situated use. MaSH Loops differ from generic sociotechnical mapping by treating evaluation itself as a recursive site of value enactment across machine, institutional, and human feedback.
