title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 59
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

generic sociotechnical mapping by treating evaluation itself as a recursive site of value enactment across machine, institutional, and human feedback.

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 45
Figure 1: MaSH Loops as an enactivist evaluation framework: machine, society, and human processes are treated as mutually conditioning dimensions of sociotechnical evaluation. The unit of analysis thus shifts from outputs to interactions: what the system becomes in context, and whose values are enacted as those interactions unfold through ongoing relevance-making. MaSH Loops makes value-enactment empirically traceable across levels, so evaluation can ask not only what the model did but how it came to matter to whom, under which incentives and norms? The MaSH Loops framework builds on a broad foundation of ethical and philosophical work in AI. Iyad Rahwan’s [319] Society-in-the-Loop made clear the need to embed democratic negotiation into algorithmic governance, proposing an algorithmic social contract to ensure systems remain accountable to society. Inês Hipólito and colleagues [173] extended enactivist philosophy into AI, emphasising how cognition and meaning are enacted through sociocultural practices, and how design choices can either reinforce or subvert those norms. Virginia Dignum [107] advanced the field of RAI by arguing for accountability, transparency, and the integration of societal values throughout the AI lifecycle. Deborah Johnson’s [190, 191] pioneering contributions to computer ethics remind us that technologies are never neutral, but embedded in human practices, responsibilities, and institutional settings. Shannon Vallor’s [403] account of Technomoral Virtues illustrates how technologies become sites of moral cultivation. Each of these contributions repositions AI as a sociotechnical participant in the enactment of values rather than a neutral instrument. MaSH Loops resonates with these perspectives but makes their insights
