title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 61
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

assive optimisation. Does the system maintain coherence and recover ethically under perturbations such as policy changes, drift, adversarial prompts)?

Chapter 1: Epistemological Rumbles in Responsible AI 47
• Participation in meaning-making over prediction alone. Does the system co-construct relevant meaning with people and institutions, rather than merely predict? • Plural values over dominant norms of one society. Can we see whose values are enacted, where they conflict, and how trade-offs are negotiated? MaSH Loops evaluates how AI systems come to understand what matters, and to whom, through machine, social, and human feedback, rather than how well they hit a static target. For example, a “safe” content policy (Society) shifts rater instructions (Human), which drives fine-tuning gradients (Machine), which then shapes user prompts and public discourse (Society) in the next cycle. Evaluating only the model’s output would miss the cross-level value shifts this cycle produces. MaSH Loops therefore provides a way of evaluating generative AI as a recursive sociotechnical system, making visible how behaviour, responsibility, and value are distributed across machine, social, and human processes rather than located in the model alone. For benchmark design, this means treating prompts, answer anchors, raters, interfaces, and deployment settings as parts of the evaluative interaction rather than neutral wrappers around a fixed property. What a benchmark elicits is partly shaped by how that interaction is staged.
1.7 Conclusion This chapter has explored the epistemological tensions within the Responsible AI community by examining how Functionalism, Constructivism, and Enactivism shape our understanding of what AI is and how it should be evaluated. These are not merely philosophical stances; they underpin how we determine whether an AI system is competent, ethical, or aligned with human values. Functionalism privileges efficiency and performance, enabling rapid benchmarking but often neglecting the contexts that shape meaning. Constructivism challenges us to see AI systems as embedded in sociotechnical realities, shaped by histories, biases, and norms. Yet both approaches can fall short when confronted with increasingly autonomous, generative, and interactive AI systems that evolve within the ecosystems they inhabit. Enactivism offers a crucial reframing. It asks not only what a system outputs, but how it participates and enacts meaning in dynamic relation to humans and institutions. Recent adjacent work pushes in a similar direction, especially on LLM agency, the limits of social cognition claims about LLM collaboration, and the operationalisation of agency in human–AI interaction [25, 171, 428] Affordances, participatory sense-making, and MaSH Loops shift evaluation toward the ongoing, recursive co-adaptation between humans, machines, and
