title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 65
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

-vanished system, and establishes why descriptive, culturally inclusive evaluation is essential for assessing alignment in contemporary generative AI.

Chapter 2: The Ghost in the Machine Has an American Accent 52
2.1 Introduction Generative AI is not culturally neutral. Models trained on internet-scale corpora reproduce statistical associations between words and the values embedded in those texts. In 2021, OpenAI’s GPT-3 was the largest and most influential example of this new paradigm. Launched with limited access and few alignment mechanisms, it quickly became a test case for both the promise of generative systems and the ethical risks they carry. At the time, public debate centred on toxicity and bias [2, 127, 364] but a deeper question was underexplored: how models shaped by predominantly Anglophone, especially US sources, would handle plural, contested values. This study offers an exploratory, historical analysis conducted before heavy fine-tuning or filters. By stress-testing GPT-3 on texts with clear, culture-specific value commitments, we show when it preserves, distorts, or overwrites those commitments; and why that matters for today’s aligned systems. These observations matter not only because the original model no longer exists, but because they capture a pivotal moment in the genealogy of generative AI, when its ‘accent’ revealed the cultural centre of gravity encoded within its training data. The fact that the original version is no longer available makes studies like this one crucial for preserving evidence of early generative AI behaviour and its cultural biases. It is the approach taken to reveal these patterns that is most important, rather than the specific model. As filtering techniques become more sophisticated, future systems may obscure these biases more effectively, though the underlying cultural patterns may persist at a deeper level. Language models do not simply generate text; they probabilistically reflect values present in their training data. When that data is heavily skewed toward Anglophone and particularly US-centric sources, models like GPT-3 become vehicles for reproducing dominant cultural norms. Human language inherently encodes complex and varied values, norms, and ideologies [197]. Thus, AI models will implicitly internalise the values in the training data and reflect those distributions in the probabilistic structures that drive their generated outputs. The metaphor ‘Ghost in the Machine’ [342] aptly captures this phenomenon: a non-physical entity (cultural biases) interacting with the physical system (the AI model). These embedded values and norms are sometimes called biases, though it must be remembered that bias is a perspective and standpoint, it can be both morally “good” and “bad”: like the vantage of a photograph, it cannot be fully erased. Beyond strictly factual content, nearly all language carries ethical framing. Our evaluations, therefore, must account not just for toxic or false outputs, but also for how a model frames contested cultural questions and whose framing it defaults to.
