title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 66
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

fore, must account not just for toxic or false outputs, but also for how a model frames contested cultural questions and whose framing it defaults to.

Chapter 2: The Ghost in the Machine Has an American Accent 53
The embeddedness of cultural and ethical biases in language and texts directly ties into the philosophical challenge of value pluralism. Values vary dramatically across societies, communities, and historical periods [175, 332]. There is no single moral canon that a globally deployed AI should align with. Ethical alignment, then, is not just a technical problem, it is a normative and epistemic one. Whose values should an AI reflect? How should it navigate conflicting or incommensurable ethical perspectives [49, 80]? Attempts to universalise one tradition of ethics risk reinscribing dominant cultural norms, such as US liberal individualism or European human rights discourse, at the expense of other legitimate frameworks. Even widely ratified documents like the Universal Declaration of Human Rights have faced criticism for privileging Western liberal values. For globally deployed AI, alignment cannot mean convergence on a single normative template; it must grapple with coexistence, negotiation, and sometimes incommensurability of values. To address these questions, we adopt a descriptive, pluralist approach. We test how GPT-3 responds to culturally diverse input texts and analyse how it reframes, preserves, or distorts embedded values. Where possible, we draw on external empirical data (such as the World Values Survey) to interpret these outputs. We also identify structural features, such as consensus-driven language in UN and UNESCO documents, that appear to reduce value drift. The chapter concludes with a discussion of pluralist evaluation methods and their potential to inform more culturally inclusive alignment strategies for future models.
2.1.1 Historical context and significance This chapter captures a critical snapshot in time, focusing on the early stages of large language model (LLM) research as it stood in 2020-2021. At this juncture, GPT-3 represented a groundbreaking advancement, significantly outperforming earlier models such as BERT (Google, 2018), GPT-2 (OpenAI, 2019), T5 (Google, 2019) and contemporaneous models such as T-NLG (Microsoft, 2020). GPT-3’s unprecedented scale, emergent capabilities, and generative versatility marked a stark departure from its predecessors, making it a focal point for exploratory research in AI ethics. GPT-3’s performance on zero-shot and one-shot (referring to the number of prompts required to elicit a correct response) learning abilities on a wide variety of tasks were seen as an impressive improvement on previous AI models. The timeline of model development and the research presented here is summarised in Table 4.
