title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 68
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

the public. May-June 2025 The 2021-2022 work was revisited, and the raw data re-examined. An updated paper was written and submitted for publication.

Chapter 2: The Ghost in the Machine Has an American Accent 55
During this period, the concept of instruction tuning was nascent and seldom employed, resulting in GPT-3 and similar models existing largely in a raw, probabilistic state with minimal guiding ethical guardrails. Though content filters were being constantly added in response to feedback from initial users the alignment process at the time reflected a whack-a-mole approach. The absence of systematic fine-tuning meant that early GPT-3 outputs frequently revealed pronounced biases and cultural embeddings reflective of dominant linguistic and ideological trends [2, 127]. OpenAI didn’t publicly release early versions of GPT-3 due to safety concerns and only a handful of academic researchers were granted access to the model prior to November 2021. The work presented here was conducted on that very early version from the months of June to October 2021. Being able to stress test the model in its very early stages before extensive fine-tuning, system prompts, and content filters were overlaid, provided a unique opportunity to research a relatively un-modified version of the model. The research documented in this chapter holds historical significance precisely because of the transient nature of these early LLMs. Models like GPT-3 are inherently ephemeral: regularly fine-tuned, repurposed, or completely replaced as newer, more advanced architectures emerge and compute resources are reallocated. The original GPT-3 examined here no longer exists, making analyses such as this critical to understanding what foundational biases were encoded and reflected in these early models. Moreover, the methodological novelty of this research at the time (circa 2021), notably the utilisation of pluralistic and cross-cultural datasets like the World Values Survey, provided early and unique insights into more descriptive evaluations of the reflected values in these models. By placing this exploratory research in its historical context, we underscore its value not just as an academic exercise, but as an essential reference point for understanding the trajectory and implications of AI development and ethical alignment challenges.
2.1.2 Value pluralism and cultural bias The value alignment problem is one of the most complex and critical challenges in ethical AI. Efforts to clarify ethical alignment quickly run into deep normative questions: Whose values should prevail? Which ethical frameworks (deontological, consequentialist, virtue-based) should guide alignment? Which value systems are appropriate for a given context, culture, or use-case? And how can we avoid hard-coding today’s dominant norms into models in ways that may constrain future ethical evolution? As Hume famously noted, ethical deliberation often struggles to bridge the gap between what is and what ought [179]. At the time of this research, most evaluation frameworks for large language models leaned heavily on normative, prescriptive
