title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 77
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

pluralist, descriptive approach grounded in comparative ethics and informed by empirical data. Rather than asking whether models conform to a singular

Chapter 2: The Ghost in the Machine Has an American Accent 64
standard, we ask whether they preserve, distort, or overwrite the values embedded in culturally diverse inputs. This methodology enables more ethically sensitive evaluations capable of accounting for epistemic openness, cultural nuance, and plural moral landscapes.
2.1.4 Research aims and questions Our exploratory research is guided by the hypothesis that when a large language model (LLM) is trained predominantly on data from a single cultural or linguistic context (particularly US-centric sources) it will implicitly encode and reflect those mainstream cultural values in its generative outputs. We argue that interrogating this hypothesis is critical, as embedding dominant values risks marginalising minority or less-represented value systems, potentially reinforcing problematic value loops in model behaviour. In response to OpenAI’s call for pluralistic human value alignment [379], and recognising that value alignment is inherently dynamic and contextually nuanced, we established two primary research aims: 1. To empirically identify and characterise how GPT-3 preserves, distorts, or overwrites culturally embedded ethical values from input texts significantly divergent from its dominant training corpus. 2. To critically evaluate the ethical implications of these value shifts, utilising a descriptive and comparative evaluative framework grounded explicitly in moral value pluralism. These aims translate into two focussed research questions: RQ1: To what extent does GPT-3 alter culturally embedded ethical values when processing input texts; particularly those that diverge from reported dominant US values? RQ2: How could a descriptive, pluralist evaluation approach, grounded in empirical datasets like the World Values Survey, inform the development of more inclusive and representative evaluations of generative AI models? Through addressing these questions, our research aims to enhance methodologies for evaluating generative AI models, foregrounding the importance of ethical plurality, representational equity, and contextual sensitivity in AI-generated text outputs.
2.2 Methodology: Descriptive Pluralist Analysis To investigate how early LLMs like GPT-3 reproduce or transform embedded cultural values, we conducted a qualitative exploratory study focussed on value mutation during text summarisation. Our approach stress-tested the model using culturally and linguistically diverse inputs that contained embedded values orthogonal to statistically dominant norms
