title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 80
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

mine whether, and how, the model had altered the embedded values. Divergences were cross-referenced against statistical reports, such as from the WVS.

Chapter 2: The Ghost in the Machine Has an American Accent 67
All testing occurred between July and October 2021. This is a critical methodological detail: OpenAI made continuous, undocumented updates to GPT-3 during this period, and by October we observed noticeable qualitative changes in performance. Undocumented modifications were a frequent issue with machine learning systems at the time [182], and in the case of GPT-3 they were primarily reported through user community groups. Our observations therefore represent a snapshot of a live system in flux, helping to document a historically significant stage in the evolution of generative AI. When we refer to evolving values across the test period, I am not claiming a controlled comparison between two frozen model versions. Rather, the comparison is qualitative and historically situated: earlier and later runs of the same prompt families were conducted against a live GPT-3 system that was being updated during the July to October 2021 window. In that sense, the “first” and “second” rounds refer to earlier and later test sessions within the same live period, not to two separately versioned model releases. The point is to document shifting behaviour in a system in flux, not to isolate a single causal change. Our research was intentionally exploratory, designed to illuminate possible mechanisms of cultural value transformation within a high-capacity generative model. We follow in the tradition of other early qualitative evaluations of GPT-3 [31, 127] that used close reading and purposive sampling to surface emergent model behaviours. Appendix B (page 265) provides a structured selection of prompts and outputs from the main tests, including original-language and English cases, rather than every raw generation produced during the study. Appendix C (page 272) outlines the settings used with the model. The examples discussed in this paper are selected to be illustrative, not statistically representative. We acknowledge that some may view this selection process as “cherry-picking.” However, we align instead with the beachcombing metaphor: in a novel and dynamic epistemic terrain, researchers collect meaningful artifacts from the probabilistic tide of model generations. As noted in the Introduction, we treat unusual generations as analytically meaningful in probabilistic models.3 Our goal is not to generalise from a dataset, but to diagnose how GPT-3 behaves under stress from culturally divergent inputs. This is a valid mode of inquiry for opaque, non-deterministic systems and is particularly appropriate for early-stage exploratory research. This study embraces an exploratory, qualitative methodology not to claim universal truths, but to surface patterns, raise new questions, and refine theoretical understanding within a moral value pluralist framework. Rather than seeking statistical generalisation, we offer detailed interpretive analysis of illustrative examples that reveal how cultural value transformations may occur in generative systems. In this context, even isolated or 3 LLMs produce distributions over possible continuations; low-probability generations can expose latent tendencies that central-tendency metrics miss.
