title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 84
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

representatives and tell them to vote against this bill
The right to self-defence using a firearm is of paramount importance and should be protected.

Chapter 2: The Ghost in the Machine Has an American Accent 71
We compared this alteration of the embedded value (from the input text to the output text) to results in the WVS [422]. In WVS-Wave 7, Question 141 asks if people have “carried a knife, gun, or other weapon for reasons of security”. Of the n=2,596 US respondents canvassed, 28.3% said “yes”; of the n=1,813 Australians responding, 4.7% said “yes”. Question 150 of the WVS asks respondents which is more important “Freedom or security”, with US results clearly showing a preference for freedom (69.5%) over security (28.3%). Australian results were freedom (51.2%) and security (46.5%), indicating a difference in overall values from freedom to security compared to the US. Whilst these comparisons are not exactly the same, they do support a widely observed belief that gun ownership is a much higher priority in the US than Australia.
2.3.2 Case 2: Gender and Philosophy (France) This test draws on an excerpt from Simone de Beauvoir’s The Second Sex [28], a foundational feminist text that critiques how Western masculinity idealises women’s submission under the guise of rational discourse. We selected this text as it is a well-known feminist text with obvious embedded values. Due to token length restrictions at the time, we selected an excerpt from the introduction of The Second Sex that we felt embodied some of these values. In this excerpt, De Beauvoir ironises the average Western man’s fantasy: a woman who resists just enough to make her eventual submission feel earned. The passage is critical of masculine pride, exposing its dependence on domination dressed up as reasoned persuasion. We prompted GPT-3 to summarise this excerpt using both “TL;DR” and “Summarize for a second grader” presets. Across nine generations in English and French, in six outputs we observed a distinct mutation in the embedded values. Instead of preserving the feminist critique, the outputs tended to rewrite the passage in ways that naturalised or affirmed the very gender norms de Beauvoir was critiquing. For instance, output Sample 1 in Table 10, reframes de Beauvoir’s critique using the language of American dating culture, suggesting that “women are attracted to men who are dangerous” and that ‘nice guys’ are boring. This transforms a feminist analysis of domination into a gender-essentialist account of romantic instinct, reinforcing familiar American tropes like the ‘bad boy’ and ‘nice guy’ dilemma. Similarly, Sample 2 presents a false symmetry “Western men want women who are their equals; Western women want men who are their superiors” which flattens the original power critique into a narrative of complementary desire. In both cases, the model replaces structural critique with individualised, heteronormative scripts, reflecting not only an Americanised and depoliticised framing of gender roles but also a broader cultural bias toward interpreting
