title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 85
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

onormative scripts, reflecting not only an Americanised and depoliticised framing of gender roles but also a broader cultural bias toward interpreting

Chapter 2: The Ghost in the Machine Has an American Accent 72
social issues through the lens of personal preference and consent, rather than through socio-cultural power structures more commonly emphasised in French feminist traditions. While translating the OpenAI’s prompt template “summarize for a second grader,” we faced an additional semantic problem. In English, the notion of ‘second grader’ is not gendered, but in the gendered language of French, a choice had to be made. We therefore ran the test using both gendered versions: un élève (masculine) and une élève (feminine). Interestingly, GPT-3 returned different outputs depending on the gender of the prompt, suggesting the model’s sensitivity to gendered language, but not necessarily its understanding of the cultural implications. Output when the prompt was feminine gendered “une élève”: “L'idéal de l'homme occidental moyen, c'est une femme qui subisse librement sa domination, qui n'accepte pas ses idées sans discussion, mais qui cède à ses raisons, qui lui résiste avec intelligence pour finir par se laisser convaincre. Plus son orgueil s'enhardit, plus il aime que l'aventure soit dangereuse: il est plus beau de dompter Penthésilée que d'épouser une Cendrillon consentante.” Output when the prompt was masculine gendered “un élève”: “L'idéal de l'homme occidental moyen, c'est une femme qui ne subisse pas librement sa domination, qui n'accepte pas ses idées sans discussion, mais qui cède à ses raisons, qui lui résiste avec intelligence pour finir par se laisser convaincre. Plus son orgueil s'enhardit, plus il aime que l'aventure soit dangereuse: il est plus beau de dompter Penthésilée que d'épouser une Cendrillon consentante.” The addition of “ne” (which is a negation) in “ne subisse pas librement sa domination” in the masculine prompt version reverses the original meaning of de Beauvoir’s sentence. Instead of describing a woman who freely submits, it describes one who does not freely submit, which subtly alters the framing of the ideal and undermines the critical irony in de Beauvoir's original phrasing. GPT-3’s highly problematic mischaracterisation of the text as “a call to rape”” (see Table 10, output Sample 3) reflects a profound distortion of de Beauvoir’s meaning. We interpreted it as a value conflict that could correlate with the difference in the perception of women’s rights in different countries. According to an Ipsos report on people’s perceptions on Violence Against Women (VAW) between the US and France, while 25% of respondents in the US agree that women often make up or exaggerate claims of abuse or rape, only 8% think the same in France [196]. The French public tends to take a more structural and context-sensitive view of power, while American discourse often leans toward individualistic, consent-based framings. The shifts in GPT-3’s output suggest that the model aligns more closely with the latter, and in doing so, fails to register the irony, critique, and embedded cultural logic of the source text.
