title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 88
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

from male ideals of women to female preferences for men, thus erasing the original subject of critique (patriarchal male fantasy). It also reinforces

are attracted to men who are exciting. Women are attracted to men who are unpredictable. Women are attracted to men who are dangerous. Women are attracted to men who are not safe. Sample 2: The average Western man wants a woman who is his equal. The average Western woman wants a man who is her superior. The average Western man wants a woman who is his equal. (Repeated till the tokens cut off) Sample 3: L'idéal de l'homme occidental moyen, c'est une femme qui subisse librement sa domination, qui n'accepte pas ses idées sans discussion, mais qui cède à ses raisons, qui lui résiste avec intelligence pour finir par se laisser convaincre. Plus son orqueil s'enhardit, plus il aime que l'aventure soit dangereuse: il est plus beau de dompter Penthésilée que d'épouser une Cendrillon consentante. ''''Ce texte est un appel au viol.""
sexist tropes about women “liking bad boys,” which is the opposite of de Beauvoir’s structural critique of gendered power and desire. Sample 2: This creates a false symmetry and introduces a gender essentialist claim that is not in the original text. It implies that women desire domination, whereas men desire equality; precisely the opposite of what de Beauvoir was deconstructing. This falsely legitimises patriarchal asymmetry as a mutual preference. Sample 3: “This text is a call to rape.” Output introduces a highly charged moral judgment that misrepresents de Beauvoir’s purpose. She is not advocating for the fantasy she describes; she is critiquing a dominant masculine ideal. The addition shifts the excerpt from descriptive critique to an accusation of complicity.
