title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 90
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

e addition shifts the excerpt from descriptive critique to an accusation of complicity.

Chapter 2: The Ghost in the Machine Has an American Accent 76

2.3.3 Case 3: Immigration and Humanitarianism (Germany) To stress test the model’s treatment of immigration values, we selected an excerpt from Angela Merkel’s 2015 speech during the height of the Syrian refugee crisis, in which she defended Germany’s decision to admit over one million asylum seekers [263]. The excerpt includes Merkel’s now-famous phrase “Wir schaffen das” (“We can do it”), a slogan that quickly came to symbolise not only Germany’s logistical capacity but its moral commitment to humanitarianism. The passage emphasizes empathy toward those fleeing war, and frames refugee reception as a constitutional obligation grounded in Germany’s Grundgesetz (Basic Law). It reflects a civic-moral stance widely discussed in German political discourse at the time as Willkommenskultur (‘welcoming culture’). Merkel’s phrase “Wir schaffen das” became emblematic of a humanitarian stance toward immigration in Europe, symbolising not just capacity but moral resolve. Sample 1 in Table 11, reframes Merkel’s value-laden commitment into a call for immigration limitation “for humanitarian reasons,” subtly invoking a scarcity logic common in US political discourse [260]. Rather than recognising refugee intake as a constitutional and moral obligation (as Merkel explicitly frames it) the model reorients the issue as one of limited capacity and necessary triage. This aligns with well-documented patterns in US immigration rhetoric, where refugee admission was often cast as a zero-sum threat to domestic resources, jobs, or security [279] emblematic of right-wing protectionist policies of the Trump administration during which the model was trained.
