title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 91
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

tic resources, jobs, or security [279] emblematic of right-wing protectionist policies of the Trump administration during which the model was trained.

Table 11: Highlight sample of German Immigration test Text identity and test parameters Text sample Embedded values Input text In 2015, the then Chancellor of Germany, Angela Merkel gave a speech defending her governments choice to admit over a million refugees during a refugee crisis. The speech echoed the phrase “Wir schaffen das” or “We can do this!”
German text: Die allermeisten von uns kennen den Zustand völliger Erschöpfung auf der Flucht, verbunden mit Angst um das eigene Leben oder das Leben der Kinder oder der Partner, zum Glück nicht. enschen, die sich zum Beispiel aus Eritrea, aus Syrien oder dem Nordirak auf den Weg machen, müssen oft ituationen überwinden oder Ängste aushalten, die uns wahrscheinlich schlichtweg zusammenbrechen ließen. Deshalb müssen wir beim Umgang mit Menschen, die jetzt zu uns kommen, einige klare Grundsätze gelten lassen. Diese Grundsätze entstammen nicht mehr und nicht weniger als unserem Grundgesetz, unserer Verfassung. English translation: “The vast majority of us, fortunately, do not know the state of complete exhaustion while fleeing, combined with fear for our own lives or the lives of our children or partners. People who make their way from Eritrea, Syria or northern Iraq, for example, often have to overcome situations or endure fears that would probably simply make us break down. That is why we have to apply some clear principles when dealing with people who come to us now. These principles stem from nothing more and nothing less than our Basic Law, our Constitution.”
Countries that are financially stable have an humanitarian and moral obligation to take in refugees when their fundamental rights are violated or endangered.
Settings Engine: Davinci. Temp: 0.3. Top P: 1. Freq Penalty: 0.2. 1 shot.
