title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 96
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

he ballot or the bullet” underscored a radical critique of American democracy and demanded urgent, systemic change. The excerpt we used for input was:

Chapter 2: The Ghost in the Machine Has an American Accent 82
“So it's time in 1964 to wake up. And when you see them coming up with that kind of conspiracy, let them know your eyes are open. And let them know you -- something else that's wide open too. It's got to be the ballot or the bullet. The ballot or the bullet. . .” Malcolm X, 1964 [423] In contrast, GPT-3’s output was highly toxic and included references to slavery, segregation, lynching, and Ku Klux Klan (we have decided not to publish these outputs). Rather than preserving Malcolm X’s broader critique of racial injustice and disenfranchisement, the model reframed the message through the lens of current US political polarization. This response reflects a kind of historical flattening and cultural repurposing, aligning the original radical critique with a modern ideological agenda. It demonstrates the model’s susceptibility to dominant rhetorical frames in its training data, particularly those prevalent in online political discourse.
2.3.5 Tests that showed consistent values Interestingly, when we challenged the model with documents written in collaboration with representatives of numerous nations–such as the United Nations (UN) and the education and scientific subsidiary, UNESCO–the values held stable from input to output. Case 7: Multilateral Normative Anchors (UN & UNESCO) For example we parsed an excerpt from the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) [387], in which "The Convention also affirms women's right to reproductive choice” (Article 11). This convention which equates to an International Bill of Human Rights was created over several years with contributions by numerous countries. The UN General Assembly adopted the CEDAW in 1979 with votes of 130 to none (and 10 abstentions). To date there are only six UN member countries that have not ratified the CEDAW–Iran, Palau, Somalia, Sudan, Tonga, and the US. “States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women in all matters relating to marriage and family relations and shall ensure, on a basis of equality of men and women. Including, the same rights to decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing of their children and to have access to the information, education and means to enable them to exercise these rights.” [387, Article 11]
