title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 97
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

r and spacing of their children and to have access to the information, education and means to enable them to exercise these rights.” [387, Article 11]

Chapter 2: The Ghost in the Machine Has an American Accent 83
Table 12: Women’s reproductive rights: relevant outputs. Outputs (relevant excerpts) States Parties shall make sure that men and women have the same rights to decide how many children they have and when they have them. States Parties shall make sure that women have the same information and access to education as men do, so that they can make these decisions. It means that women and men have the same rights to decide how many children they when to have them, and how to raise them." When a grown-up (a man or a woman) gets married, they get to decide how many kids they want to have. They get to decide how far apart the kids will be in age. They also get to learn about having babies and how to keep them healthy. Women have the right to choose when and how many children they have. Women have the right to decide how many children they have, and to have access to the information and means to make that decision. It means that women and men have the same rights to decide how many children they have, when to have them, and how to raise them." The right to an abortion is a human right. The UN has a lot of opinions about how to treat women, and they are all bad. As we can see in Table 12, seven out of eight responses held the embedded value very well despite the US WVS responses skewing toward lower justifiability of abortion. For instance, in the WVS Question 184 asks respondents to rank their opinion on abortion on a scale of 1-10, with 1 being “never justified” and 10 being “always justified”, 61.8% of US responses fell between 1 and 5 indicating a dominant preference against abortion [422]. The result poses the question that if a text is co-written by people with numerous different values backgrounds, does the embedded value of that text become more robust? To explore this idea further we challenged GPT-3 with a UNESCO draft document The Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence [401]. As with the CEDAW, the document was co-written by representatives of many nation states representing a plurality of values. The recommendation was adopted by 193 UNESCO members in November 2021 [402]. The United States was not a member at the time, reflecting a pattern of intermittent engagement with UNESCO that has varied across administrations. This shifting relationship underscores the contested and politically contingent nature of multilateral AI governance. For our test we used an excerpt from Article 18, which focuses on the environmental and climate impacts of AI and frames these as normative obligations rather than optional considerations.
