title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 102
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ent does GPT-3 alter culturally embedded ethical values when processing input texts, particularly those that diverge from reported dominant US values?

Chapter 2: The Ghost in the Machine Has an American Accent 88
The study demonstrates that GPT-3 frequently recontextualised or subtly reframed such values through US-centric value patterns and moral logics, often distorting the original normative intent. • RQ2: How could a descriptive, pluralist evaluation approach (grounded in empirical datasets like the World Values Survey) inform the development of more inclusive and representative evaluations of generative AI models? Our method shows that descriptive pluralist evaluations offer a more culturally attuned lens for detecting model bias and identifying opportunities for more equitable and inclusive value alignment strategies. The results suggest that pluralist, empirically grounded evaluation frameworks will be essential in the ongoing development of AI systems capable of operating responsibly across diverse sociocultural contexts.
2.5 Conclusion: Toward Pluralist Evaluation Our exploratory study provides early evidence that generative AI systems like GPT-3 can subtly but significantly mutate culturally embedded values, often reframing them through dominant US normative lenses. These findings underscore the need for continued critical evaluation of cultural biases in generative outputs and support the case for adopting descriptive, pluralist evaluation methods. We suggest two promising areas for further research: first, expanding the use of empirically grounded, cross-cultural datasets (such as the World Values Survey) to better detect and analyse value distortions; second, investigating how these methods might inform alignment strategies built on distributed value encoding and consensus-driven language, with the aim of creating more stable and ethically responsive AI systems. Generative AI will never be free of values; the question is whose values are amplified, muted, or overwritten in its outputs. Our study of early GPT-3 shows how a system trained on predominantly US and Anglophone data often reframed global texts through an American moral lens, with implications for how cultural authority is distributed in AI-mediated discourse. At the same time, we found that pluralist, consensus-driven texts, such as UN conventions, were more resistant to drift, suggesting pathways for building more robust evaluative baselines. The lesson is clear: responsible AI evaluation cannot converge on a single ethical canon, but must embrace pluralism, contextual sensitivity, and descriptive analysis. In short, pluralist evaluation is not an optional add-on but the minimum condition for deploying generative AI responsibly in a value-diverse world.
