title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 105
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

arket “The map is not the territory.” Alfred Korzybski, A Non-Aristotelian System and its Necessity for Rigour in Mathematics and Physics (1931) [210]

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market. 93
Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market Applying Responsible-AI concepts to the Real Estate Industry Abstract Artificial intelligence is reshaping the real estate industry, transforming valuations, property management, tenant screening, and market analysis. Adoption has been rapid, but regulatory and educational capacity has lagged, leaving educators to navigate a fragmented landscape of Responsible AI frameworks, safety debates, and risk-management guidance. This chapter addresses that gap by translating Responsible AI concepts into an applied real estate context. The chapter focuses on three foundations. First, model design: bias enters not only through data but also through choices of architecture, optimisation, and objective functions. Second, sociotechnical systems mapping: housing-market outcomes are co-produced through recursive interactions among human actors, machine systems, and institutional rules, making visible where accountability lies. Third, market design: AI systems can be structured to nudge or reshape behaviour, amplifying or mitigating inequalities in areas such as lending, pricing, and tenant selection. Through real estate-specific and cross-sector case studies, the chapter shows how Responsible AI concepts operate in practice. These examples reveal both promise and peril: efficiency gains in valuations, but also the reinforcement of structural bias; improved tenant screening, but with heightened privacy and fairness concerns. Within the broader thesis, the chapter functions as an applied domain case showing how sociotechnical evaluation concepts can be translated into practice, even while retaining the more standalone style of its pedagogical origins. It offers classroom activities and an individual assignment that encourage critical engagement and contextual application, demonstrating how Responsible AI can move from principle to practice in a domain that touches almost everyone.
