title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 106
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

engagement and contextual application, demonstrating how Responsible AI can move from principle to practice in a domain that touches almost everyone.

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market 94
3.1 Responsible AI-Real Estate AI-driven technologies, including generative AI, are transforming how real estate markets operate and how their risks must be evaluated. Artificial Intelligence (AI), including subfields like Machine Learning (ML), Deep Learning (DL), and Generative AI (GenAI), is rapidly reshaping the real estate industry. These technologies are already being applied across a range of tasks: gaining a competitive edge, automating time-consuming processes, or simply keeping up with industry trends. Table 14 provides a non-exhaustive overview of the areas where AI is currently being deployed in real estate. While these advances offer clear efficiencies, they also raise important ethical, legal, and societal questions. These questions do not arise from AI systems alone, but from the recursive interactions through which machine outputs, institutional rules, and human decisions jointly shape real estate markets. Given these challenges, a thorough understanding of Responsible AI (RAI) should now be integral to any university real estate curriculum. Table 14: Types of Tasks that AI is Applied to in Real Estate. Property valuations. Market analysis and predictive analytics such as pricing trends. Property management including tenant applications and price setting. Investment advice. Lead generation. Smart buildings including energy efficiency and security systems. Regulatory compliance. Real estate marketing; including writing listings and enhancing photos. RAI is a rapidly growing field that addresses the ethical, legal, and social risks involved in deploying AI systems. Unlike fields such as healthcare, finance, or criminal justice (which have received broad scrutiny) real estate has been comparatively slow to engage with the deeper implications of AI. Most literature in this space focuses on practical and technical benefits, such as increased automation or efficiency, with relatively little attention given to the ethical frameworks required for responsible deployment. Recent research in real estate AI has rightly flagged issues such as data quality, algorithmic transparency, and risk and compliance. However, these concerns do not capture the full range of ethical and safety challenges that arise when AI intersects with housing, investment, and urban development. As a result, educators and practitioners in
