title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 107
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

hical and safety challenges that arise when AI intersects with housing, investment, and urban development. As a result, educators and practitioners in

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market. 95
real estate are often left navigating fragmented research with limited guidance for responsible implementation. Many of the insights and frameworks developed in broader Responsible AI literature are transferable to this domain. In this thesis, real estate functions as an applied case for showing how sociotechnical evaluation concepts travel into practice, especially where generative AI systems mediate access, advice, pricing, and market perception. Through a MaSH Loops lens, these outcomes are shaped not by models alone, but by recursive interactions among technical systems, institutional settings, and human uptake. Chapter outline. • Existing research: The chapter begins by surveying foundational RAI issues already explored in the real estate context: data quality, transparency, accountability, and compliance. These are critical first steps for students but require expansion. • Beyond RAI basics: The chapter introduces advanced, underexplored topics such as model design, sociotechnical systems, market design, and the evaluation of AI systems in applied settings. Drawing on case studies both within and outside of real estate, these sections aim to deepen conceptual understanding and transfer key lessons across domains. • Real-world impacts: Students are encouraged to see AI systems not as neutral tools, but as agents that actively shape markets, access to housing, and patterns of investment 4. Misaligned or biased models can reinforce structural inequalities and lead to unintended consequences. • Mitigating risks: A set of mitigation strategies is offered not as a definitive checklist, but as a springboard for further critical thinking and innovation in ethical model development and deployment. • Class activities: The chapter concludes with applied learning activities that help students map, critique, and redesign AI systems for more just, transparent, and human-centred outcomes. These conceptual tools, drawn from AI ethics and safety, can empower real estate educators and students alike to analyse how generative AI systems should be evaluated in context, including how machine outputs, institutional settings, and human decisions interact in shaping market outcomes. As the field matures, a well-rounded approach to RAI will support fairer markets, reduce harm, and improve trust and transparency across the real estate ecosystem.
4 This broader thesis treats such effects as emerging through recursive Machine-Society-Human (MaSH Loops) interactions rather than from models in isolation. See §1.6.7 for the fuller account of MaSH Loops as an enactivist evaluation framework.
