title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 108
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

(MaSH Loops) interactions rather than from models in isolation. See §1.6.7 for the fuller account of MaSH Loops as an enactivist evaluation framework.

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market 96
3.2 Existing research in RAI and real estate Core principles of RAI (including data quality, transparency, accountability, risk management, compliance, and human-centered design) hold particular importance in real estate, where vast volumes of personal and financial data are processed. These foundational topics provide a vital framework for educators introducing RAI concepts in AI-Real Estate courses.
3.2.1 Data The principle that poor-quality data leads to flawed outcomes has long been acknowledged. George Fuechsel of IBM coined the term Garbage-In-Garbage-Out (GIGO) in the 1950s [331]. With today’s large and often unstructured datasets, the impact of GIGO has only intensified. Mathematician Clive Humby famously called data "the new oil" [235], and with modern neural networks, models can uncover patterns in vast, often messy, data sources [232]. In real estate, incomplete demographic information or outdated property records can skew automated valuation models (AVMs), affecting pricing and investment decisions. Ethical concerns now extend beyond data quality to its provenance and usage. Questions to consider: Does the data respect privacy rights? Is it appropriate for the task or simply easy to access [208] and who owns it? In the case of crowd-sourcing, who is “the crowd” and are they the right people to be sourcing [102]? What ethical considerations must we consider when using crowd-driven platforms like Amazon’s Mechanical Turk [309] such as worker compensation and their subjective biases and standpoints. For example, if crowd-sourced labelling of property images is skewed by workers’ subjective judgements, it may produce biased AVMs and inadvertently harm certain buyers, sellers, or tenants.
3.2.2 Transparency and Explainability Transparency in AI is about making automated decision-making processes understandable to all stakeholders, from industry professionals to regulators and consumers. Many real estate algorithms are "black boxes," either due to proprietary restrictions or sheer complexity. A black box algorithm refers to a computational process whose internal logic or parameter interactions are either undisclosed or so complex that humans cannot readily interpret how specific inputs produce certain outputs, even if the model’s inner workings are not literally hidden [120, 215]. This lack of explainability undermines trust and allows discriminatory patterns to persist.
