title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 110
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

the EU AI Act [122], and the UK Parliament’s AI-focussed bills [399] span a broad range of scopes and enforcement mechanisms, turning compliance into

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market 98
a moving target, especially across international boundaries or under unpredictable political leaderships. Superficial “box-ticking” approaches to RAI have increasingly been criticized as ethically hollow, sometimes referred to as “ethics washing” [40, 239]. Merely offering disclaimers or boilerplate codes of conduct does little to address underlying biases and problems in the AI pipelines [273]. Students must learn not just the laws, but adaptable RAI skills to navigate shifting legal and ethical terrain.
3.2.5 Trustworthiness Trustworthiness in AI-driven real estate tools depends on consistent reliability, transparency, and fairness; qualities that foster confidence among buyers, sellers, and industry professionals. The EU framework for trustworthy AI [123] defines three pillars: • Is it lawful and compliant with applicable laws? • Is it ethical? Does it align with the ethics and values of the people using and impacted by the AI? • Is it robust both from a technical and social perspective? Many governments and major tech firms cite trust as a core AI principle. In 2023, the Biden administration issued an executive order promoting "safe and trustworthy AI" [388], later revoked by President Trump [359]. Trust in AI platforms and decision-making directly impacts diffusion and adoption of these technologies [6]. A 2022 Oxford study noted property industry reluctance to adopt these tools, citing concerns about accuracy and fairness [424] As such any deployment of AI into the real estate sector should take this factor into consideration and address mitigation issues head-on.
3.2.6 Human-centred Human-centered AI focuses on designing and deploying systems that enhance, rather than undermine, human capabilities and well-being. In real estate, tools that balance efficiency with user experience (UX), fairness, and trust can mitigate the vulnerabilities people face when algorithms shape critical life decisions, such as tenant screenings or property appraisals. A human-centered approach considers the broader human system (homeowners, investors, property managers, and community members) ensuring that AI augments human judgment without creating or exacerbating social inequities. This section has introduced foundational RAI principles (data, transparency, accountability, compliance, trustworthiness, and human-centeredness) as they apply to real estate. These concepts should form the basis of any AI-Real Estate curriculum. While not exhaustive, they offer a robust ethical and practical grounding. The next section builds
