title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 111
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ld form the basis of any AI-Real Estate curriculum. While not exhaustive, they offer a robust ethical and practical grounding. The next section builds

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market. 99
on this foundation, introducing less explored but essential RAI topics that help future professionals anticipate systemic risks and promote equity in the property market.
3.3 Beyond RAI basics Building on the above foundational RAI topics, this section delves into more advanced concepts: model design, sociotechnical mapping, and market design. From automated valuations to risk scoring, well-crafted models can drive better property decisions, while poorly designed models risk amplifying biases and misunderstandings. While the basics remain vital, real estate practitioners and educators increasingly confront complex challenges, such as reconciling multiple stakeholders’ interests, managing wide-ranging financial risks, and maintaining fairness in rapidly shifting market conditions. By examining how AI-driven models are constructed (3.1 Model Design), how technological and human elements interact within real estate ecosystems (3.2 Sociotechnical Mapping), and how model designs can be systematically shaped for more equitable outcomes (3.3 Market Design), educators can better prepare students to navigate a rapidly shifting landscape.
3.3.1 Model Design A model is an abstraction of the real world. A simplified framework designed to represent a more complex system or phenomenon. By stripping away unnecessary details, a model allows us to focus on specific aspects or dynamics of a system, making it easier to understand, analyse, and predict behaviour in a controlled manner. Models are created through human decisions about what data and parameters to include and exclude, as well as which cause-and-effect relationships to emphasise or ignore. Model designers also decide what tangible, measurable datapoints will serve as proxies for more abstract concepts. What is critical to remember is that models are not neutral: they are human-guided abstractions and representations of the real world (Figure 2), shaped by decisions about data, framing, and emphasis. While we often think of models as being driven by mathematics and algorithms, they also reflect the assumptions and perspectives of their creators.
