title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 113
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ed guidelines for representing the surface of a sphere on a flat plane. The Mercator projection preserves angles but stretches areas toward the poles.

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market. 101
The political and social context behind these decisions is often overlooked. On Jan 20, 2025, the White House issued EO 14172, directing federal agencies to use “Gulf of America” and to update Geographic Names Information System (GNIS). Google began reflecting this via location-based labels on Feb 10, 2025: US users see “Gulf of America,” Mexico sees “Gulf of Mexico,” and for everyone else "Gulf of Mexico (Gulf of America)" [326]. This is a striking reminder that maps (and models) are shaped by power and social pressures. Just as naming a body of water can alter public perception, describing a neighbourhood as “Prime” versus “High Risk” can influence buying patterns, lending decisions, and even urban policy. Models are everywhere in daily life, from GPS directions to credit scores. In real estate, models underpin automated valuation tools, rent-pricing algorithms, and lender risk assessments. Recognising that these systems are built upon specific data, assumptions, and priorities enables professionals to treat algorithmic outputs critically, rather than as infallible. Whether selecting features for a home-pricing model or deciding which risk variables to include in a tenant-screening tool, thoughtful model design fosters fairer, more reliable outcomes. A simple classroom activity, like adjusting a single factor in an automated valuation model and observing how it shifts the estimated price, can powerfully illustrate the implications of design choices. By directly engaging with these “levers,” students can observe how modelling decisions ripple across real estate markets, underscoring the need for responsible and reflective AI practices.
3.3.2 When we remove humans from the centre of AI. Placing blind trust in mathematical models risks decentring the very humans such models aim to serve. Many examples show how mathematical and AI models, when applied to complex social systems, can unintentionally cause harm by excluding certain groups or perspectives from their design [291]. While these models can offer powerful tools for understanding and prediction, their simplifications can lead to significant oversights especially when applied to human contexts. A well-known example, explored below, illustrates how such systems can encode and amplify structural bias when removed from their social context. It has become a canonical reference point in discussions of responsible AI and offers a useful entry point for educators before turning to real estate-specific cases. Case Study: Bias in a risk recidivism model. In the United States, a commercial risk assessment tool called the Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions (COMPAS) was used by courts to predict the likelihood that a prisoner would reoffend. A 2016 ProPublica investigation revealed that the
