title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 115
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

case to help students identify how supposedly “neutral” data or algorithmic decisions can perpetuate bias, unless explicitly critiqued and corrected.

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market. 103
3.3.3 How Generative AI models work This section offers technical background for educators who want to help students understand how AI models function, particularly in real estate contexts 5. We frequently task computers to process data through human-designed models. In the case of AI and machine learning (ML), we sometimes ask machines to search for new patterns, relationships, or predictive signals. At their core, AI models use statistical techniques to recognise and learn from patterns in numerical data. The process typically begins by abstracting some part of the real world, converting it into numerical data, and then applying algorithms to analyse it. When models are trained on past data, they "learn" relationships between inputs and outcomes. The resulting numerical depiction of our real world (a trained AI model) can then use what it learned to look for similar patterns in new data and provide descriptions or predictions of our world. The term “AI” is a very broad, poorly defined, and shifting term. In this text, we will consider AI to mean a neural network. A neural network is a type of model inspired by the human brain. It consists of layers of interconnected nodes (or “neurons”) that process data. Each node receives inputs, applies a weighted sum and a non-linear function (often called an activation function), and passes the result to the next layer. Through training (i.e. adjusting the weights based on feedback from the output compared to the expected result) the network learns to recognize patterns, make predictions, or classify data by essentially approximating complex mathematical functions. At a high level, this process can be understood as a sequence of design choices that translate aspects of the real world into computable form. Decisions about what to measure, how to represent it, and how to weight relationships between variables are not neutral. They determine what the model can “see” and how it can act. The diagram below (Figure 4) provides a simplified representation of this process, highlighting how data selection, abstraction, and model architecture combine to shape outputs. It is not necessary to follow every technical detail in the diagram. Instead, it can be read from left to right as a conceptual flow from input data through layers of transformation to final outputs. The key point is that each stage involves human choices about representation and weighting, and these choices structure what the model ultimately produces.
5 This section on the basics of how Gen AI works is included in Chapter 3 as it was written for publication in an academic text-book.
