title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 116
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

mately produces.
5 This section on the basics of how Gen AI works is included in Chapter 3 as it was written for publication in an academic text-book.

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market 104
Figure 4: Model Design of an AI Neural Network. This diagram shows how model design decisions, such as selecting proxies for property characteristics and adjusting weights across layers, directly shape predictions. Just as the data fed into the network can bias the results, structural choices in model design (such as the number of layers or activation functions) also have a profound impact on the final outputs. More simply, both the data and the way a network is architected shape how effectively and fairly a neural network will perform. There has been a lot of hype in the last few years about AI models overtaking aspects of society and blame placed on their “black-box” nature, where the internal decision-making process is opaque and difficult for humans to interpret. However, it is essential to remember that AI models are human designed, fed by data selected by humans, and applied in ways that some humans decide. Models are fundamentally human made and as such accountability for the outputs and uses of AI models rests squarely with us. In Figure 4, we can see that the “black box” of an AI model is really just that there are so many calculations happening inside the model that it is impossible for the human mind to make a useable mental picture of what is happening. Figure 4 also illustrates how individual data points (e.g., property size, location, building age) are converted into inputs for abstract outcomes like price predictions. The term "bias" in neural networks refers to a small adjustment added to the output of a node. For example, a bathroom scale that always reads a few pounds too high has a "bias." This helps a network shift its output away from zero, allowing for more flexible and accurate pattern detection.
