title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 117
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

s a few pounds too high has a "bias." This helps a network shift its output away from zero, allowing for more flexible and accurate pattern detection.

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market. 105
Although these calculations are mathematically traceable, the sheer volume of operations can render the model's internal logic effectively uninterpretable. This has led to concerns about “black box” AI. However, it is important to remember that even opaque models are still built and steered by humans. One response to this opacity is the development of AI systems that return "reasoning" or intermediate outputs along the way to a final decision. These local explanations are still early-stage but may offer improved transparency. AI models have become widespread in real estate. For example, an AI model might analyse housing market trends using inputs such as supply, demand, interest rates, and proxy indicators for economic conditions. The model might find, for instance, that when interest rates drop, demand increases, leading to higher home prices if supply remains constant. This type of predictive modelling can inform investors, policymakers, and planners, offering speed and automation beyond traditional valuation methods. The key takeaway here is that even highly technical AI systems are shaped by human decisions. Their fairness, accuracy, and social impact depend on how thoughtfully they are designed, trained, and deployed.
3.4 Sociotechnical Mapping and Bias 3.4.1 Sociotechnical Systems in Real Estate AI-Real Estate is not just about data and algorithms, it’s about how those tools interact with people, institutions, market norms, and regulations. Just as a map simplifies complex terrain, real estate models abstract the property market, inevitably leaving out nuance. Removing all bias from these systems is impossible, especially when models are built on historical data shaped by uneven development, policy, and access. Sociotechnical mapping helps us unpack how AI tools in real estate, like valuation engines or tenant screening systems, are influenced by and influence the broader ecosystem, including agents, buyers, lenders, and government bodies. When we speak of AI applications to real estate or Proptech, we are in reality creating models to describe the world of real estate that use AI-powered technologies to apply statistical methods to make predictions or decisions based on the model and data we provide to the machine. Our decisions of what data to include in these processes directly impacts the results that AI models produce and thus the outputs of that model (Figure 5). For example, in the case of an AI generated property valuation report, someone decides which data is relevant and which will be included or excluded. Then, an AI is employed to glean deeper insights.
