title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 118
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

rty valuation report, someone decides which data is relevant and which will be included or excluded. Then, an AI is employed to glean deeper insights.

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market 106
Figure 5: Human and AI Decisions Sit Between the Real World and Analysis Outputs. Any time we abstract data from the real world and manipulate it to gain deeper insights or predictions, we cannot help but include perspectives and biases in the creation of the resulting report. As Alfred Korzybski [210] famously put it, “The map is not the territory”. every output is a simplified version of reality, built from numerous design choices. Overfitting a model with too many parameters can make it unwieldy; conversely, under-specification can obscure key insights. Navigating this balance is central to responsible model use.
3.4.2 Bias is inevitable To truly grasp the ethical risks of applying AI technologies to the real estate industry, it is important to understand why it is impossible to remove all bias. Often you hear in business literature that some organisation or AI model has been built to “remove” all bias: this is a nonsensical statement that indicates a fundamental lack of understanding of both AI technologies and model building. Some students are only taught about the risks of AI at a superficial level such as poor data going in leads to poor data coming out. Whilst GIGO is an important part of the story, it is not the entire picture. Trying to eliminate bias from a model is like attempting to remove the perspective from a photograph: the angle always shapes what’s seen and what’s left out. Claiming that you can completely remove bias from an AI model is like saying you can design a house that’s completely free of any architectural style or regional influence. Every house will inevitably reflect design choices influenced by the builder's taste, local traditions, and practical considerations. Another example can be found in human resources: every hiring decision is influenced by bias, even when recruiters use structured interviews and scoring systems. The criteria they prioritise, such as experience over potential, cultural fit over diversity, or technical skills over soft skills, reflect implicit values that shape who will be hired. The word bias is often used as short-hand for toxic-bias. Certain biases in AI models, particularly those that reinforce discrimination or harm, raise ethical concerns. Toxic-bias
