title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 119
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

s short-hand for toxic-bias. Certain biases in AI models, particularly those that reinforce discrimination or harm, raise ethical concerns. Toxic-bias

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market. 107
in AI is a real and significant problem that many scholars and researchers have studied for several years. However, bias in a model doesn’t necessarily imply negative or harmful perspectives; it refers to the inescapable vantage point or weighting that emerges from the data, the algorithms, and the goals chosen by those building or deploying the model. Early Generative AI models (GenAI) often exhibited obvious toxic bias [2, 127, 192]; and, whilst most tech companies have put in notable effort to mitigate these biases, they have often been addressed with “band-aid” type fixes such as system prompts and content warnings rather than removing the toxic proclivities from the underlying model. Bias in AI is not merely a technical problem but a contextual one. Rather than aiming to eliminate bias, RAI focuses on understanding and mitigating it within context. Think of it as understanding the system rather than trying to fix the system. AI ethicists focus on recognising and acknowledging bias, assessing its potential harmful impacts within the specific context where a model will be used, and then determining whether, and how, that bias should be mitigated. This approach ensures that the model remains both effective and equitable, aligning its outcomes with the needs and values of the communities it serves.
3.4.3 Case Study: Zillow and Bias in Their Algorithm Zillow, a US-based real estate marketplace, launched a public-facing, algorithm-powered home valuation tool in 2006. This model relied on historical data and human-curated inputs. However, flawed assumptions and embedded biases led to systematic overestimations of property values. The inaccuracies resulted in financial losses and damaged trust in Zillow’s services [376]. This case highlights that bias in AI is deeply intertwined with the data and design choices made during development, underscoring the importance of transparency and ethical oversight in AI-driven decision-making. Zillow have made significant improvements since that time Bias entered the Zillow model through choices about data selection, feature weighting, and model architecture. Although Zillow has made improvements, [194], it is still a model of the real world and as such subject to challenges and inevitable biases. This case illustrates how deeply embedded biases can shape outcomes, even when intentions are good. More importantly, it shows that models are not neutral reflections of reality; they are part of it. The data used to train a model interact with market behaviour, creating feedback loops that influence both user trust and valuation outcomes. The Zillow case also links directly back to the theoretical frame of this chapter. If the map is not the territory, then an automated valuation model is not simply reading the housing market but helping to organise how that market is seen and acted on. Sociotechnical mapping makes this visible: training data, proxy choices, organisational incentives, user behaviour, and market expectations all interact. In that sense, Zillow is not
