title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 120
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

s visible: training data, proxy choices, organisational incentives, user behaviour, and market expectations all interact. In that sense, Zillow is not

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market 108
just an example of inaccurate prediction. It is a case of recursive feedback between model, institution, and market, where outputs can shape later behaviour and thereby alter the conditions the model is meant to describe. Table 16: Drawing out sociotechnical concepts from the Zillow example. Concept Zillow example Goal Provide an algorithmic estimate of a property’s market value (the “Zestimate”) for public use. Abstract concept being modelled
The likely sale price (or “fair market value”) of a given property at a given time.
Data proxies used
Historical home-sale data, listing details (e.g., square footage, number of bedrooms, local amenities), and possibly user-generated inputs. Data issues
Scraped or purchased listing records, public property data, user-submitted updates (e.g., homeowners adjusting square footage), and market trends. Potential issues include incomplete or outdated listings, overrepresentation of certain areas, or self-reported data inaccuracies. Stakeholders Buyers (may rely on inaccurate valuations, leading to overpaying or missed opportunities), sellers (might inflate listing prices or mistrust Zillow’s estimates), real estate agents (potentially losing credibility or business), and Zillow itself (facing financial losses and reputational damage). Trustworthiness Does the model align with both real-world transaction data and the interests of the people using it? Are the underlying assumptions (e.g., weighting of local comps) transparent, and does Zillow regularly audit for bias or misevaluation particularly in areas with scarce data or historical biases?
3.4.4 Visualising relationships using sociotechnical maps A sociotechnical system (STS) is a model that involves humans (people and societies) and technology (machines and software) and seeks to map the relationships between these two key aspects as well as other influencing factors[117, 395]. An STS may include relationships between humans and technology and complex infrastructures that the system operates within. Figure 6 is modelled off Emery and Trist’s [117] original work on sociotechnical systems: in it we can see how the relationships between people, industry structures, computer systems, and the reports we create (i.e. property valuations) can interact in a complex manner.
