title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 125
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

s don’t merely reflect patterns in real estate markets; they also play a role in shaping them. For instance, in AI-powered Purchasing Recommendations,

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market. 113
algorithmic preferences can reinforce specific property trends, influencing which areas receive investment and visibility. Over time, such loops can evolve beyond individual market behaviours to affect systemic structures, impacting property values in whole areas, urban planning, and even social mobility.
3.4.6 Class Activity: Mapping Purchasing Recommendations Ask students to imagine a real estate platform that uses AI to recommend neighbourhoods to prospective buyers based on previous search history, property values, and local amenities. Over time, the system may begin to favour certain neighbourhoods based on click-through rates or quicker sales. This leads to more visibility for those areas, driving up demand and prices, which in turn reinforces the algorithm’s preference. Meanwhile, other neighbourhoods receive less exposure and stagnate. Step 1: Concept Table In small groups, have students create a table identifying: • The goal of the AI model • The abstract concept it is trying to predict (e.g., buyer interest or suitability) • The proxies used (e.g., search data, past purchases) • The data sources and how they’re collected • Stakeholders and potential impacts • Questions about trustworthiness and fairness Step 2: Create a Sociotechnical System Map Next, students should map the key actors and systems involved. Encourage them to: • Identify the human and technical components (e.g., users, platforms, real estate agents, local governments) • Show the relationships between these nodes (e.g., who influences what) • Mark any feedback loops (e.g., user behaviour influencing algorithmic recommendations, which influence market activity) Discussion: Conclude with a whole-class discussion on how algorithmic recommendations may contribute to market reinforcement or distortion. Ask: To what extent are these models describing reality versus constructing it? This activity reinforces the key concepts of sociotechnical feedback, proxy design, and ethical awareness in AI-powered real estate tools.
