title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 127
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

. But countries around the world differ in this decision: the US aims for 2%, China 3%, India 4%, and Switzerland below 2% [69]. These seemingly small

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market. 115
numerical differences carry weight; they shape expectations, policy responses, and ultimately, how central banks model and manage their economies. • Taylors rule: developed in the US in 1992, this model uses a variety of financial inputs to calculate prescribed interest rates [226]. While widely referenced, its application varies across countries and regimes. For instance, some governments place more weight on inflation, while others emphasise employment or growth. In politically charged contexts, central banks may even be pressured to ignore Taylor-like models entirely. • The cash rate target: a model used to determine the overnight interest rates between banks [325]. While the cash rate model is used in many countries to guide short-term interbank lending rates, how it is applied can vary significantly depending on the political climate, economic ideology, and cultural context. In some nations, central banks operate with strong independence; in others, decisions may reflect the priorities of the ruling government, the influence of powerful financial institutions, or deeper cultural attitudes toward inflation, debt, and market intervention. Whether these policies are justified or not, they demonstrate that economic models directly shape the economies they describe. And because interest rates and inflation deeply affect real estate markets, these models are tightly linked to the AI-powered systems used in property valuation, development, and financing. Figure 11 uses an STS map to show some of the types of feedback loops that contain economic models that impact the real estate industry.
