title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 129
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

specific land parcels (each with designated use restrictions and development guidelines), then invites eligible developers to bid within a transparent

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market. 117
auction or tender system[221]. This setup exemplifies a “smart market” approach because it relies on structured rules and mechanisms much like those advocated by market design scholars to encourage competitive yet orderly bidding. As well, they can reveal true market demand and help the government achieve broader urban-planning goals (e.g., balanced growth and housing availability) through precise control over what is built and when. Table 17: Drawing out sociotechnical concepts from the Singapore GLS example. Concept Singapore’s GLS example Goal Allocate publicly owned land to private developers via a structured auction or tender system, aiming for balanced urban growth, housing availability, and efficient land use. Abstract concept being modelled
A “smart market” that ensures fair competition for land parcels while aligning projects with broader urban-planning priorities (e.g., avoiding over-concentration).
Data proxies used
Reserve prices, developer eligibility, land-use restrictions, each reflecting policy objectives.
Data issues
The government sets tender conditions and enforces compliance; agencies oversee the bidding process and monitor whether winning developers meet guidelines. Stakeholders Government/Regulators: Gain control over land-use outcomes. Developers: Operate within structured bidding rules. Community: Benefits from carefully planned developments but could face higher costs if prices escalate. Trustworthiness Transparency in auctions can reduce corruption but might still favour larger corporations with deeper pockets. Ongoing oversight is needed to ensure alignment with long-term policy goals. Unlike the harm-oriented case studies elsewhere in this chapter, the GLS example is included as a contrast case. Its purpose is to show that sociotechnical design is not only about bias or failure: structured rules can also be used deliberately to coordinate behaviour, reveal demand, and steer market outcomes. In thesis terms, it illustrates market-making more than model error. Governments are not the only ones who engage in market shaping. Individuals and investment groups can also manipulate or nudge markets using similar mechanisms.
3.5.3 Market Design by Individuals In 2022, Citadel founder Ken Griffin moved his family and the firm’s headquarters from Chicago to Miami [253]. This single decision sparked sharp increases in local real estate prices. Citadel employees followed, purchasing homes and driving up demand in already high-value neighbourhoods. The ripple effects were significant: local agents cited the move as a catalyst for a surge in luxury property prices. Longtime residents and small businesses
