title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 130
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ple effects were significant: local agents cited the move as a catalyst for a surge in luxury property prices. Longtime residents and small businesses

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market 118
faced higher costs. But when interest rates rose and some staff chose not to relocate, the market cooled, creating volatility for buyers and developers alike. This example underscores how the decisions of a single, high-profile individual can effectively design a market—albeit unintentionally.
3.5.4 Market Design by Investment Groups During 2022-2023, rising interest rates in Australia triggered speculation by AI-driven valuation models and media narratives that property prices would fall, causing buyers to hesitate and prices to dip [247]. Meanwhile, property firms bought undervalued properties, anticipating a market rebound. When the Reserve Bank of Australia paused rate hikes, property values surged back up, leaving regular buyers priced out [101]. These examples reveal that the line between modelling and market-making is far thinner than it first appears. Real estate is not a neutral terrain onto which we apply tools; it is an evolving sociotechnical system shaped by values, incentives, and design choices, both human and machine. As AI systems increasingly influence how property is priced, sold, financed, and developed, small shifts in model assumptions (or deliberate manipulation) can have wide-reaching consequences. Without robust oversight and a deep understanding of how models interact with social and economic contexts, we risk undermining public trust and amplifying existing inequities. For real estate educators, the challenge is not only to teach how these models work, but to equip students with the critical tools to question who designs them, whose interests they serve, and how they shape the markets we live in.
3.6 Real World Implications AI-driven models in real estate have far-reaching consequences beyond mere efficiency gains in property valuation. The very act of model building—deciding which data to include, the weighting of features, and the abstraction level—plays a critical role in shaping market outcomes. In Australia, for example, research on mass valuation using big data has demonstrated that even state-of-the-art automated valuation models (AVMs) can produce skewed estimates if the input data or model assumptions embed historical biases. These biases not only affect property prices and investor confidence but also influence broader urban development trends, potentially reinforcing patterns of disinvestment or overvaluation in certain neighbourhoods. The sociotechnical feedback loops inherent in AVM systems illustrate how human decisions in model design interact with machine outputs to drive real-world market dynamics, ultimately impacting sustainability and social diversity. In the realm of investment advice, AI-powered platforms in Australia, such as those used for mass valuation by CoreLogic, Pricefinder, and Pointdata [256], can inadvertently
