title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 131
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ent advice, AI-powered platforms in Australia, such as those used for mass valuation by CoreLogic, Pricefinder, and Pointdata [256], can inadvertently

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market. 119
create self-reinforcing cycles. If an AVM consistently overvalues properties in high-demand areas, it may draw investor attention to those regions, inflating prices further and exacerbating regional inequality. These feedback loops contribute to speculative bubbles while leaving other areas undercapitalised. The ethical implications extend beyond pricing, impacting mortgage eligibility and even housing insurance access [76, 427]. The issue of toxic-bias plays a significant role when AI is used for residential tenant selection. The residential rental crisis is impacting many people of lower incomes across many countries in 2025. Increasingly, landlords and agencies are turning to AI to sift through applications and make decisions on renters: often with unfair outcomes.
3.6.1 Case vignette: Senior denied housing by algorithm In the US in 2018 a 75-year-old many named Chris Robinson applied for housing in a California senior living community. An AI-driven screening programme designed by a company called TransUnion, denied his application by assigning him a high-risk score [60]. The model had mistakenly attributed a littering conviction to him that belonged to a different man with the same name in Texas. Though the error was later corrected, Robinson lost the apartment and application fee. A class-action lawsuit followed, resulting in an $11.5 million settlement. This case exemplifies how even minor data labelling errors, when amplified through automated systems, can produce major human consequences. This short vignette is included to foreground a basic but consequential sociotechnical failure before the fuller CoreLogic case below. The harm emerged through the interaction of data provenance, identity matching, screening software, housing providers, and weak recourse mechanisms, rather than from a single isolated technical glitch. The full concept-table treatment is therefore attached to the CoreLogic case, which develops the same problem in a more structurally layered form. Regulatory bodies are beginning to respond to these challenges. In Australia, there is growing momentum among policymakers to establish stronger oversight of AI-driven valuation models. Concerns about transparency, data quality, and algorithmic fairness have led to calls for mandatory algorithmic audits, explainability standards, and improved data governance. These steps are crucial to ensure that AI supports equitable outcomes in lending, leasing, and land-use planning.
3.6.2 Case study: Tenant screening and historical racism In a 2018 lawsuit, CoreLogic, a major player in tenant-screening software, faced allegations that its “CrimSAFE” algorithm violated the US Fair Housing Act [63]. The suit claimed that CrimSAFE’s automatic rejection of applicants based on prior arrests (even withdrawn
