title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 133
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ant vulnerability recursively interact, producing housing exclusion as a property of the wider sociotechnical loop rather than of the algorithm alone.

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market. 121
3.6.2.1 Class activity: Compare concept tables The concept tables for the COMPAS, Zillow, Singapore GLS, and CoreLogic examples can now be used for further exploration. Compare the data and assumptions behind the four case studies, highlighting consistent themes such as reliance on historical records and the socio-legal impact of automated decisions. Invite students to probe how each model defines the “abstract concept being modelled”: e.g., how does CoreLogic define risk? Discussion prompts could include questions on stakeholder pressures (e.g., how landlords wanting rapid screening might clash with fair housing regulations) and the ethical obligations of AI developers to detect or correct errors. By mapping out these considerations, students gain a clearer view of how tenant-screening tools can embed bias at multiple points, reinforcing the importance of rigorous auditing, transparency, and appeal mechanisms. The above examples highlight how AI is not just a tool but an active agent in shaping markets, communities, and access to housing. When left unchecked, it can reinforce existing inequalities and create barriers to economic mobility. It is at this point in the course that educators could direct students to work on the first activity.
3.7 Mitigating Challenges Mitigating the ethical challenges inherent in AI-driven real estate models starts with rigorous data governance and careful model design. Ensuring that training datasets are diverse, accurate, and free from historical prejudices is paramount. This involves implementing regular audits of data sources, preprocessing steps to identify and correct imbalances, and incorporating techniques such as XAI to illuminate the model’s decision-making processes. • Model Developers: Are responsible for shaping the overall model architecture. They can reduce systemic biases by sourcing diverse datasets and documenting design decisions, including the parameters included or excluded, the abstraction boundaries drawn, and the provenance of all data used. • Model Technicians: Play a critical role in implementing and maintaining model transparency. This includes logging variable selections, detailing how features are weighted, and articulating the assumptions embedded within the algorithmic logic. • Regulatory Bodies and Oversight Professionals: Must ensure that models used in real estate comply with legal and ethical standards. This includes mandating documentation, requiring algorithmic audits, and supporting explainability measures that make models understandable to end users and affected parties.
