title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 135
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

y mortgage risk assessment). Also, state limitations, such as not capturing rapid neighbourhood gentrification or relying on outdated historical data.

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market. 123
• These are only a few suggestions for factors that could be included in model cards. A working model card is likely to have many more aspects. It is important that model cards don’t become a tool for “ethics washing” and care must be made to ensure this risk mitigation strategy be incorporated with other factors. Model cards are not a silver bullet. Nor are they, as Google [151] notes, a “one-size-fits-all” solutions. They may need to be embedded within broader transparency frameworks. Students and future professionals should be encouraged to create and critique model cards as part of their AI literacy. Real estate students should be encouraged to develop their own model cards after examining a range of examples [92].
3.7.2 Diverse Stakeholder Engagement Responsible AI development depends on engaging a wide range of stakeholders throughout the model lifecycle. This includes domain experts, community representatives, regulators, and those most impacted by real estate decisions. These voices help ensure that models reflect lived realities, align with ethical values, and remain accountable to public interest. Establishing formal feedback loops, where model outputs are regularly tested against real-world outcomes, enables iterative improvement and correction. In high-stakes contexts such as tenant screening or housing investment, regulatory frameworks and independent audits are essential for ensuring fairness, preventing harm, and maintaining public trust.
3.7.3 Accountability Accountability in AI-driven real estate applications requires clear delineation of responsibilities across every stage of the model lifecycle from data collection and curation to deployment and monitoring. Developers of the models should maintain detailed records of their decisions, including which variables are selected and how they are weighted, so that the rationale behind any valuation outcome is transparent and traceable. Making these decisions legible, especially to regulators, end-users, and affected communities, is foundational to building trust and ensuring AI systems in real estate remain open to scrutiny.
3.7.4 Mechanisms for Recourse When AI systems cause harm such as delivering inaccurate valuations or unfairly screening out tenants there must be clear paths for investigation, explanation, and redress. This includes both technical review and human oversight. Real estate regulators and professional bodies can reinforce this by requiring: • Publicly documented scoring criteria.
