title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 136
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

al review and human oversight. Real estate regulators and professional bodies can reinforce this by requiring: • Publicly documented scoring criteria.

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market 124
• Transparent error correction processes. • Appeal mechanisms for disputing algorithmic decisions. By making recourse possible, the system signals that accountability doesn’t end with automation. Such measures not only build trust among stakeholders but also underscore that, even in automated processes, ultimate responsibility and accountability lies with human actors who design, deploy, and oversee the technology.
3.7.5 Sustainability Sustainability in AI-Real Estate goes beyond efficiency. It involves aligning economic, environmental, and social priorities to support resilient communities and long-term urban planning. Well-designed models can forecast infrastructure needs, environmental risks, and demographic shifts, helping guide policy and investment toward inclusive, eco-conscious outcomes. For example, models that integrate environmental indicators can help identify areas where green building initiatives will have the most impact. Embedding sustainability principles into model design ensures that AI does more than reflect short-term trends, it helps shape future-ready cities that serve all. In short, humans must remain at the centre of AI-real estate ecosystems. Models may abstract, calculate, and optimise, but it is human decisions, values, and oversight that determine whether these technologies serve the public good or exacerbate existing inequities. Humans are ultimately accountable, and it is humans that will be positively or negatively impacted. These mitigation strategies, ranging from rigorous data governance to stakeholder engagement, are not only theoretical tools, but practical frameworks that students can apply in real-world contexts. Educators may wish to encourage students to apply these principles by designing their own more ethical AI models.
3.8 Conclusion Bias in AI models often originates from the data on which they are trained. Historical datasets used in property valuation can reflect past discriminatory practices or systemic imbalances, meaning that any model built on such data risks perpetuating those biases. For instance, if past transactions undervalued properties in certain neighbourhoods due to socioeconomic or racial prejudices, AI systems may continue to assign lower values to these areas, further entrenching inequality. Another source of bias arises from the process of abstraction inherent in model building. When developers choose which variables to include and how to weight them, they embed their own perspectives and assumptions into the model. This intentional
