title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 137
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

evelopers choose which variables to include and how to weight them, they embed their own perspectives and assumptions into the model. This intentional

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market. 125
simplification is necessary for practical analysis, but it also means that some nuances of the real world are lost, resulting in a skewed representation that can inadvertently favour certain outcomes over others. In effect, every model is a product of subjective choices that shape its outputs. Compounding these issues is the opaque nature of many AI systems. Especially in complex machine learning and generative models, internal decision-making processes are often difficult to interpret, raising concerns about fairness, accountability, and trust. This is particularly problematic in real estate, where AI-generated valuations and tenant assessments can materially affect people’s financial security, access to housing, and long-term wealth. Mitigating these risks requires more than technical fixes. It calls for a comprehensive, sociotechnical approach that blends rigorous data governance, explainable AI techniques, stakeholder consultation, and regulatory oversight. Transparency, documentation, and human-in-the-loop design must become standard practice, not optional add-ons. While AI models hold great promise for increasing efficiency and generating insights in the property sector, they are not neutral or objective mirrors of reality. They are constructed systems shaped by people, for particular purposes and they must be critically assessed as such. If educators and practitioners approach AI not just as a technical innovation but as a value-laden tool within a broader system, the real estate industry has the potential to build a more equitable and sustainable future. Trust between consumers, real estate agents, and regulatory bodies should be built on ethical transparency with full acknowledgement that a real estate model is only ever a human and machine representation of a market.
