title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 138
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

hould be built on ethical transparency with full acknowledgement that a real estate model is only ever a human and machine representation of a market.

Chapter 3: The Model is Not the Market 126
3.9 Student activities and assignment The activities that follow are included deliberately as part of the chapter’s pedagogical design: they operationalise the sociotechnical concepts developed above and show how responsible AI evaluation can be practised, not only described, within a domain setting.
3.9.1 Mapping (team activity) Evaluating an AI-Driven Real Estate Model Provide students with an AI-powered real estate model to assess its responsibility, ethics, and safety. The model could be an online property valuation tool, a property report from a national body, or an academic proposal for integrating AI into real estate. Students should critically examine: • Model design (assumptions, parameters, and limitations) • Who created the model and their potential biases • The context and environment in which the model operates • Input data sources and any potential biases • How the model's outputs are applied in real-world decision-making • Potential feedback loops and unintended consequences Encourage students to visually map the model’s structure (possibly using a whiteboard and movable sticky notes) to identify relationships, influences, and gaps. This collaborative approach allows for diverse perspectives, leading to a more comprehensive analysis. Once the map is complete, students should expand their findings in text format, discussing both positive and negative aspects of the system.
3.9.2 Designing (team activity) Designing a More Ethical AI-Real Estate Model Building on their analysis, students should design an improved AI-driven real estate model that enhances fairness, accountability, and transparency. Again, they should start by mapping the system before refining their ideas in text. Key considerations: • Should there be more human oversight (human-in-the-loop decision-making)? • What regulatory measures or ethical safeguards should be included? • Who should be involved in the model's design and governance? • What stakeholders may be affected, especially vulnerable groups? • How can bias and unintended consequences be mitigated? • What external factors or unknowns should be accounted for?
