title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 141
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

The World Values Benchmark 129

The World Values Benchmark “All models are wrong, but some are useful.” G.E.P. Box, Science and Statistics (1979) [52]

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 131
Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark Building an AI evaluation methodology from a meta-ethic viewpoint. Abstract This chapter introduces the World Values Benchmark (WVB), the methodological core of the thesis. Whereas most benchmarks are normative, prescribing how models ought to behave, WVB is descriptive: it situates language model outputs within existing cross-cultural value distributions and makes divergences visible without adjudicating them. The framework fills a gap between performance-oriented leaderboards and broad sociotechnical critique by providing a reproducible method that captures pluralism while controlling for known artefacts of prompt sensitivity and anchor bias. The methodology combines four elements: prompt sets to dampen paraphrase effects, balanced answer anchors to reduce framing skew, Bayesian bias correction to counter training priors, and sociotechnical mapping to keep validity tied to context. Together, these safeguards strengthen construct validity and make model behaviour empirically legible. Applied to early models (LaMDA and PaLM), WVB revealed clear item-level alignment with US value profiles on culturally charged issues such as abortion and religiosity. Yet aggregate placement on the Inglehart–Welzel cultural map was closer to southern and central European societies such as Spain and Luxembourg. These findings show how descriptive evaluation can surface both the imprint of US training data and the ways those imprints shift under aggregation. The contribution is twofold: empirically, WVB demonstrates that naïve single-prompt methods overstate alignment, while distributional profiles provide more stable placements; conceptually, it reframes benchmarking as relational measurement. The chapter establishes WVB as a tool for culturally inclusive, contestable evaluation—an approach that can inform more democratic decisions about model alignment and governance.
