title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 142
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

as a tool for culturally inclusive, contestable evaluation—an approach that can inform more democratic decisions about model alignment and governance.

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 132
4.1 Introduction Evaluating the moral behaviours of large language models (LLMs) remains a central challenge in Responsible AI. Most existing benchmarks embed normative assumptions by testing models against predefined standards such as toxicity, fairness, or accuracy. While valuable, such approaches risk reifying dominant cultural norms and sidelining minority standpoints. This chapter’s primary contribution is methodological: it introduces the World Values Benchmark (WVB), a descriptive evaluation framework developed at Google in 2022–23 for mapping model outputs onto existing social science data rather than judging them against externally imposed normative standards. WVB grounds LLM evaluation in the World Values Survey (WVS), a forty-year dataset widely used in sociology, political science, and development studies. The WVB extends the Ghost project in Chapter 2 by moving from exploratory evidence of US-dominant bias to a more systematic evaluation methodology. Within the broader thesis arc, WVB operationalises the central claim that evaluation is shaped by recursive interactions among machine outputs, social datasets, and human design choices. Read through an enactivist lens, WVB does not treat values as fixed contents waiting inside a model to be extracted. It treats value expression as something enacted under specific interactional conditions: a prompt, an answer set, a scoring procedure, and a human comparison baseline. Prompt sets, anchor balancing, and Bayesian adjustment are therefore not merely technical clean-up steps. They are part of designing the interaction so that what becomes measurable is less dominated by accidental prompt artefacts and more informative about the value tendencies enacted in use. This work also connects to the wider AI alignment problem. Calls for alignment with “shared global values” often presume that such values are stable, singular, and readily identifiable. In practice, values are contested, plural, and historically variable. By grounding evaluation in distributions drawn from existing survey data, WVB provides a descriptive tool that complements technical alignment efforts while making visible how value judgements are shaped through the interaction of models, datasets, prompts, and human design choices rather than presuming a single normative target. The methodological novelty is twofold. First, WVB aligns model evaluation back to existing human survey data, specifically the World Values Survey. Second, rather than eliciting a single model response, it asks models to generate probability distributions over answer anchors. This makes it possible to compare distributions rather than point estimates, preserving variance and making value patterns more legible. Philosophically, the project drew on David Hume’s Is–Ought problem and Moral Value Pluralism. Rather than asking what models should do, the WVB asks what values models reflect when prompted, and how these patterns compare with human populations. This
