title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 144
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

petitive pressures that distort what benchmark scores are taken to mean [119]. Leaderboards compressed heterogeneous behaviours into one number, while

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 134
contamination and prompt sensitivity inflated claims of ‘human-level’ performance. Leaderboards for reading comprehension, commonsense reasoning, mathematical skills and more, created a way for companies to boast superiority: a model’s worth appeared to be the sum of its scores. This accelerated iteration and generated useful stress tests, but it also subtly standardized what counted as progress—for better or worse [181]. Composite dashboards and “win-rate” tallies compressed heterogeneous behaviours into single numbers, making change easy to read while masking the measurement choices underneath. As new benchmarks were layered atop earlier ones (GLUE→SuperGLUE; Winograd→WinoGrande; ANLI; BIG-bench; later evaluations often reused earlier datasets, task framings, and score interpretations without re-examining whether the underlying constructs remained valid. In that sense, the benchmark ecology became genealogical: what looked like fresh evidence for model progress was often partly inherited from earlier design choices. Often “franken-benchmarks” assembled from reused datasets became standard inclusions in model release papers. Concurrently, synthetic prompt-generated benchmarks began letting models create tests for themselves, raising concerns about feedback loops and value amplification in AI evaluated by AI. More precisely, these evaluations were rarely measuring a model in isolation. They were measuring a model-prompt-dataset-metric arrangement, where what appeared to be a property of the model was often partly an artefact of task wording, benchmark composition, and scoring design.
4.2.2 Flaws in Evaluation Benchmarks This section traces how contemporary benchmark practices emerged and stabilised across model release cycles. The goal is not to catalogue benchmarks exhaustively, but to show how specific design choices become sedimented into evaluation practice and later treated as natural or inevitable. Rather than treating benchmarks as neutral instruments, it approaches them as historically layered artefacts shaped by shifting assumptions about language, reasoning, and evaluation. In this sense, the analysis is partly archaeological: it follows how ideas about “commonsense,” task design, and capability have been inherited, adapted, and obscured across successive benchmark constructions. The limitations of existing benchmarks are well documented. The Turing Test [398], initially celebrated as a breakthrough, was rooted in gender imitation and proved easy to game. Later tests such as the Winograd Schema [224] sought to capture “commonsense reasoning” through short linguistic puzzles requiring pronoun resolution based on background knowledge rather than surface cues. Many of the tasks encoded culturally specific assumptions about what counts as commonsense. Davis [97] made this explicit when he described commonsense as what a “typical seven-year-old child” should know—a
