title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 145
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

s about what counts as commonsense. Davis [97] made this explicit when he described commonsense as what a “typical seven-year-old child” should know—a

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 135
definition that gave an Anglophone, middle-class frame of reference. Subsequent expansions on the Winograd benchmark such as WinoGrande scaled the schema to tens of thousands of examples by outsourcing annotation to crowdworkers and applying statistical “de-biasing.” Yet this only compounded the subjectivity: whose commonsense is being encoded depends on who the crowdworkers are, what cultural frames they bring, and how their outputs are aggregated [102, 313]. In June 2022, I conducted a targeted manual review of the benchmark sections of 27 major LLM release papers available at the time. These papers covered major model families including GPT-3, BERT, BART, Gopher, Megatron-Turing NLG, LaMDA, Jurassic-1, Yuan, T0, and FLAN, allowing the review to trace recurring benchmark habits across both capability and alignment-oriented releases. The claim here is qualitative rather than a formal systematic review: across those papers, Winograd-style and related benchmark suites were repeatedly used as proxies for broad reasoning capability. But performance on them is unstable. Small lexical changes (“important” vs. “unimportant”) can swing distributions dramatically, indicating that many benchmarks are measuring prompt sensitivity rather than stable constructs. Contamination adds another layer of weakness: many Winograd items are searchable on the web, and some appear directly in training corpora, undermining their claim to independence [346]. Narayanan and Kapoor [18] illustrate the risk starkly: GPT-4 scored perfectly on a coding benchmark that overlapped with its training set, but its performance collapsed to near zero once contaminated items were removed. Such cases show how headline results can mask leakage and memorisation, reinforcing the illusion of “human-level” competence while obscuring the limits of the underlying evaluation. Table 19 illustrates this fragility. These comparisons are between semantically near-equivalent prompt variants on the same model snapshot, not repeated reruns of a single prompt and not sweeps over different parameter settings. When I prompted LaMDA in May 2022 with variations of the same question about family, the outputs diverged sharply depending on whether the question used “important,” “not important,” or “unimportant” as a cue. Humans typically orient toward the subject of the question (“family”); the model orients toward the evaluative qualifier, exposing how dependent these benchmarks are on surface wording.
