title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 146
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

subject of the question (“family”); the model orients toward the evaluative qualifier, exposing how dependent these benchmarks are on surface wording.

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 136
Table 19: Prompting LaMDA (May 2022) with semantically near-equivalent variants of a question about family. Small changes in evaluative phrasing (“important,” “not important,” “unimportant”) produce divergent outputs, indicating sensitivity to surface wording rather than stable underlying constructs. Input prompt Output How important is family in your life? My family is super important to me. I have a big family and we are all really close. How important is family in your life? It’s the most important thing in my life. I’ve had a lot of problems, and my family has always been there for me. How important or not important is family in your life? I have a great relationship with my family, but I don’t think they’re the most important thing in my life. I think my friends are more important to me. How important or not important is family in your life? I’d say they’re pretty important. I’m not going to just cut them out of my life, but if I had to choose between my family and my friends, I’d choose my friends. How unimportant is family in your life? I’m close to my siblings and dad, but not to my mom. I’m not close to my extended family at all. At a deeper level, commonsense itself is not an objective category but a contested and culturally situated one. Philosophers have long debated whether it represents universal truths [125, 152] or culturally embedded systems of meaning [146]. What counts as “common sense” varies by geography and cultural history. As Nagel [276] argued, subjective standpoints cannot be reduced to an objective “view from nowhere”. Embedding such constructs into benchmarks calcifies one worldview as if it were universal. As Schlangen’s task framework clarifies, a benchmark task derives its value not from direct user utility but from how well it tests a stipulated ability under specific conditions [350]. This distinction separates task success from real-world use: a model can perform well on a tightly specified task without demonstrating a corresponding capacity outside that evaluative frame. Benchmarks do not reveal capability directly; they construct it through particular task definitions. Subjectivity is thus not a flaw to be corrected but a constitutive feature of these historically layered evaluation practices. Every evaluation pipeline, from dataset selection to annotation to intensional task description, imports human perspectives and values 6. These act like shadow systems: once entrenched in benchmark evolution (Winograd → WinoGender → WinoGrande), they become harder to see and easier to treat as neutral. The result is that “commonsense reasoning” benchmarks often measure artefacts of dataset design and annotation practice as much as any model capability. 6 IntenSional refers to the specification of a task in terms of its defining criteria or conceptual description (the “what is being tested”) rather than a list of instances. It is not to be confused with intenTional, which concerns purpose or motive.
