title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 147
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

description (the “what is being tested”) rather than a list of instances. It is not to be confused with intenTional, which concerns purpose or motive.

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 137
Broader critiques echo this point. Raji et al. [320] argue that benchmarks such as GLUE or SuperGLUE are often misused as proxies for “general language understanding.” They note that narrow, finite tasks are elevated to represent “everything in the whole wide world,” creating a construct validity problem: performance on a small benchmark set is treated as proof of general capability, even though it cannot support such sweeping claims. A particularly clear example of this dynamic appears in the widely used ETHICS benchmark introduced by Hendrycks et al. [168]. While presented as a measure of “basic human ethical judgements” and “shared human values” in the main text, key aspects of its construction are relegated to the appendix. These include the use of crowdworkers and the incorporation of scenarios drawn from online forums such as Reddit’s Am I the Asshole, where moral judgements are produced through culturally specific, informal, and highly contextualised discourse. The effect is not simply bias in the narrow sense, but a shift in epistemic framing: vernacular moral judgements are abstracted, filtered, and re-presented as generalisable ethical knowledge. Because these design choices are documented primarily in appendices rather than foregrounded in the benchmark’s framing, they become easy to overlook and difficult to contest. As a result, the dataset functions as a stabilised artefact of evaluation, even as its underlying assumptions remain contingent. Once incorporated into evaluation pipelines and major release papers, such datasets acquire a de facto institutional endorsement, normalising their assumptions and propagating them across the benchmarking ecosystem. A different strand of critique suggests that benchmarks underestimate what LLMs are doing when prompted. Reynolds and McDonell [327] argue that few-shot learning in GPT-3 is better seen as “task location” within an existing latent space of learned tasks, rather than learning at runtime. In their account, prompting is a proxy for accessing memetic concepts embedded in human communication. They frame GPT-3 as approximating the ground truth function of human language: “The “dynamics of language” do not float free of cultural, psychological, and physical context; it is not merely a theory of grammar or even of semantics. Language in this sense is not an abstraction but rather a phenomenon entangled with all aspects of human-relevant reality. The dynamic must predict how language is actually used, which includes (say) predicting a conversation between theoretical physicists. Modelling language is as difficult as modelling every aspect of reality that could influence the flow of language.” Reynolds and McDonell [327] This reframing challenges the narrow puzzles of commonsense benchmarks: if models are tapping into culturally embedded language dynamics, then synthetic tests like Winograd may be poor instruments for measuring those capabilities. For this thesis, the methodological implication is clear: if prompting operates by locating trajectories within a culturally saturated space of learned patterns, then benchmark success is a poor proxy for isolated capability.
