title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 148
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ates by locating trajectories within a culturally saturated space of learned patterns, then benchmark success is a poor proxy for isolated capability.

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 138
Recent work reinforces these critiques. Ismayilzada et al., [186] show that models which excel on standard commonsense tests falter when reasoning is embedded in real-world tasks, exposing the over-optimism of synthetic puzzles. Davis’s Survey of Commonsense Benchmarks [98] catalogues more than 100 datasets and concludes that most lack stable construct definitions, contain inconsistent items, and report contamination poorly. Lin et al., [233] find that even when benchmarks claim to measure commonsense, models that perform strongly cannot reliably critique or correct their own reasoning, suggesting that benchmark success may reflect superficial pattern-matching rather than deep capacity. A systematic review by McIntosh et al. [255] confirms these concerns across 23 popular benchmarks. They highlight recurring issues: instability under prompt variation, contamination from training data, and inflated scores due to overfitting. The authors conclude that many benchmarks reward superficial pattern-matching and produce fragile leaderboard rankings that collapse under minor perturbations, calling instead for dynamic and adaptive evaluation methods. Contemporary large suites diverge in philosophy but often fall into similar traps. BIG-bench [366] aggregates results over 200+ heterogeneous tasks and is accompanied by a public leaderboard, which encourages single-table comparisons. HELM [229], by contrast, was designed to avoid single-number rankings: it evaluates models across scenarios and a broad set of metrics (accuracy, calibration, robustness, fairness, toxicity, efficiency) without an aggregate score. Yet HELM’s coverage and metric choices are themselves value-laden, which the authors acknowledge (e.g., heavy English focus), so even “holistic” dashboards can function as de facto leaderboards. This tendency toward aggregation was already visible in major 2022 release papers. Google’s PaLM paper reports state-of-the-art performance across a wide range of benchmarks, emphasising performance on 28 of 29 tasks as evidence of broad capability, despite the heterogeneity of the underlying evaluations [79]. Similarly, DeepMind’s Chinchilla paper opens with an overlaid comparative figure positioning Chinchilla against Gopher, GPT-3, and MT-NLG, while the abstract claims that it “uniformly and significantly outperforms” these models across a large range of downstream tasks [174]. Elsewhere, the paper reports a single average 5-shot accuracy over 57 MMLU tasks and an average BIG-bench improvement over Gopher, compressing heterogeneous evaluations into summary comparative signals [174].
