title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 151
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

etorical form: not always as a single number, but through selective benchmark framing that still invites general conclusions about overall capability.

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 141
Google’s Gemini materials make a similar move through benchmark bundling rather than explicit scalarisation: Gemini 2.0 is presented through a comparison table spanning general knowledge, code generation, reasoning, factuality, multilingual understanding, mathematics, long-context understanding, image understanding, audio translation, and video analysis, while Gemini 2.5 Pro is described as leading common coding, mathematics, and science benchmarks [202]. Philosophically, many early benchmarks were shaped by functionalist and objectivist assumptions, in the limited sense that they treated benchmark scores as if they transparently revealed intrinsic model properties such as intelligence, reasoning, or commonsense (see Chapter 1). But benchmarks do not access such properties directly. They capture situated behaviours produced under specific prompt, dataset, and scoring conditions. As Schlangen [350] argues, benchmarks must be distinguished between their intensional aims, what they claim to measure, and their extensional datasets, what they actually test. When those collapse, evaluations end up measuring artefacts of task design as much as model capability. When I examined these benchmarks closely (during my Google internship in 2022), I found myself peeling back layer after layer of studies that built on one another without interrogating their underlying measurement assumptions. Often the most problematic assumptions were relegated to appendices of preprints that never underwent peer review. This was the break-neck era of leaderboard races, where every new release paper declared its model “the best.” What emerged was a digital archaeology of benchmarks: layered evaluative constructions, each inherited from the last and increasingly treated as neutral ground. This mirrors the opening claim that benchmark practices stabilise through sedimented design choices that later appear natural or inevitable. The alternative defended here is not relativism or the rejection of measurement. It is a construct-validity and sociotechnical approach aligned with the thesis’s broader enactivist and pluralist framework. Benchmarks are made, not found: they inherit the value standpoints, omissions, and priorities of the communities that build them. A descriptive evaluation therefore makes its assumptions explicit, situates results in context, and treats outputs as enacted within Machine-Society-Human loops rather than as neutral read-outs of intrinsic intelligence.
4.2.3 Normative vs Descriptive Benchmarks Most LLM benchmarks are implicitly normative: they test whether models conform to standards defined by developers, such as commonsense reasoning, toxicity reduction, or bias detection. While important, these standards encode cultural assumptions; often
