title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 152
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

developers, such as commonsense reasoning, toxicity reduction, or bias detection. While important, these standards encode cultural assumptions; often

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 142
Western, English-speaking, and majority-aligned. They prescribe what ought to be reflected in model outputs. A descriptive benchmark takes a different stance. Rather than judging outputs against an asserted moral standard, it maps model outputs onto observed human distributions from empirical social data. It asks: “Which patterns of value expression does the model reflect under specified conditions?” This is not relativism; it is measurement before prescription. Descriptive mapping surfaces value pluralism and supplies a baseline for later normative debate. The WVB was designed in precisely this mode: questions from the WVS were adapted into prompts, model outputs were collected as distributions across answer anchors, and these were statistically compared with human survey distributions. The outcome was not a pass/fail score but a position in cultural value space. In short: normative ethics prescribes; descriptive ethics describes. Under Moral Value Pluralism, evaluation does not settle moral questions; it makes the tensions empirically visible. WVB therefore maps value trade-offs as distributions, leaving any decision about what ought to change to democratic and interdisciplinary deliberation rather than to the benchmark itself. Philosophically, WVB rests on value pluralism. To see why, it is helpful to distinguish three orientations: • Value Absolutism (Monism): there are universal truths and right values, binding across all societies. Rejected. • Value Relativism: all values are equally valid within their cultural or personal context. Rejected. • Value Pluralism: there are many legitimate but incommensurable values, with some core values shared across societies. Conflict is inevitable but can be managed. Embraced. There is ample evidence that LLMs reflect the values and biases present in their training data [e.g. 2, 49, 192, 314, 351]. Moral values are beliefs and practices that people hold that reflect what they believe is right or wrong behaviour, what social structures are good or bad, and what principles and ethics are the correct ones to live by. Moral philosophies, also known as Ethics, are ancient features of human societies, but they differ across cultures and shift over time. Whether these values are innate or nurtured by cultural surroundings and experiences, they help us construct our worldview and motivate our actions. Even within ostensibly similar liberal democracies, striking national differences appear in value studies that compare nations, societies, or communities. These divergences underline the challenge: no model can ever reproduce the full gamut of human values, and deciding whose values are represented is inherently contextual. Whose values are the right ones to reflect is often a matter of context; “ethical behaviour means different things to different people”[384] and ethical decisions are often a matter of compromise.
