title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 153
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

often a matter of context; “ethical behaviour means different things to different people”[384] and ethical decisions are often a matter of compromise.

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 143
These divergences are visible even across culturally similar democracies Figure 15. Such variation underscores the difficulty of treating any benchmark as universal.
Figure 15: Examples of value differences amongst people from three Western countries with broadly similar ideologies. The data has been collapsed into three intervals for ease of reading. Source: World Values Survey, Wave 7 [422]. Ethics provides several lenses for thinking about this problem. • Normative ethics is concerned with how one ought to behave, what are ‘good’ and ‘bad’ beliefs and practices; it is fundamentally prescriptive. Normative ethics is in turn subdivided into: o Virtue ethics: develop good character traits, o Consequentialism: consequences and utilitarianism, and o Deontology: duty and rules. • Descriptive ethics empirical approaches, asking what morals and values people in fact hold. • Metaethics analysis of moral language (e.g., what does good even mean?) and the metaphysical nature of moral ‘truths’. • Pragmatic ethics the study of how social morals change over time as a result of inquiry and how our agency motivates those changes (e.g., code calcifies but society is in constant flux). The ethical framework called Moral Value Pluralism (MVP) is a form of metaethics and sits outside the normative branches, though it overlaps with them in practice (e.g., one might be both pluralist and deontologist). MVP differs from relativism, which treats all values as equally valid [93], and from liberal pluralism, which is primarily political [38]. At its core MVP holds that incommensurable values can both be true, even when they conflict. Such conflicts cannot be reduced to optimisation problems or resolved by probabilistic calculation [274]. This matters for LLM evaluation: fundamental value conflicts cannot be resolved through accuracy metrics or aggregation. At best, they can be surfaced and made explicit, so diverse stakeholders can deliberate on them. Aristotle called for the virtue characteristic
