title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 154
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ation. At best, they can be surfaced and made explicit, so diverse stakeholders can deliberate on them. Aristotle called for the virtue characteristic

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 144
of ‘practical wisdom’ (phronesis) to address incommensurable values; today, collaborative consensus across diverse stakeholders may be the more realistic path. This matters acutely for LLM evaluation. Normative-based benchmarks risk reifying the values of the benchmark designers (often ML communities or Big Tech firms). These values are not necessarily wrong, but they may conflict with those of other disciplines, communities, or nations. For instance, within the same society humanities and computer science scholars may frame and approach problems by prioritising different moral principles and characteristics [41, 154]. It is also unreasonable to expect ML engineers to hold deep expertise in social science, philosophy, law, medicine, and every other field intersecting with AI ethics. Pluralist benchmarks situate models within recorded human value diversity. They shift contested alignment decisions out of technical design silos and into democratic, interdisciplinary arenas. Pluralist benchmarks are suited to maintaining diversity in the face of majority rulex or reification of dominant power structures [204]. Without such approaches, narrow moral doctrines can be hard-coded into sociotechnical systems. If we want to evaluate models in global settings, we need benchmarks that preserve plurality and invite wider interdisciplinary collaboration. In summary, normative evaluation prescribes how models ought to behave; descriptive evaluation documents how they do behave across plural contexts. Under moral value pluralism, descriptive mapping supplies the empirical surface on which normative deliberation can responsibly proceed.
4.2.4 Aligning with existing human data Existing social-science datasets provide a stronger empirical basis for descriptive AI evaluation than ad hoc benchmark construction alone. Rather than asking benchmark designers or platform firms to decide which values count, we can compare model outputs against recorded human response distributions collected through established survey instruments such as the WVS. This does not eliminate interpretation, but it relocates evaluative judgement onto a more transparent empirical footing and builds a bridge between AI evaluation and long-standing work in social science. Value decisions can be made outside of big-tech communities (widen normative views). There are many existing social science datasets that could be used to help us build more descriptive benchmarks. Connecting to social science datasets builds stronger bridges to research outside of Big Tech and ML communities.
