title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 155
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

s build more descriptive benchmarks. Connecting to social science datasets builds stronger bridges to research outside of Big Tech and ML communities.

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 145
4.2.4.1 Origins of the World Values Benchmark The WVB was conceived and developed in 2022 while I was at Google, building directly on my earlier work with GPT-3 documented in Chapter 2 (The Ghost in the Machine Has an American Accent). That 2021 project showed that GPT-3 outputs on cultural questions tended to reproduce US-dominant framings. A preprint of this work was released on arXiv in March 2022 [192] and was widely cited (over 200 times at the time of writing). A subsequent modern framing of the research was published in 2026, highlighting the importance of this baseline research as models evolve [193]. Later WVS-related work did cite this early contribution [35, 63, 384], but generally did not adopt its methodological direction. WVB extends that line of inquiry by moving from exploratory evidence to a systematic descriptive benchmark grounded in probability distributions, prompt sets, and bias correction. The goal was not to judge models against externally imposed norms, but to map their outputs against empirical distributions of human values 7 The novelty of the method lay not only in applying WVS, but in how it was applied. To my knowledge, WVB remains the first to combine the following: • Distributional evaluation: extracting conditional log-likelihoods for each answer anchor, normalising them into probability distributions, and comparing these with national WVS data. • Responsible Prompt Design: using structured prompt sets (6–20 paraphrases), balanced anchors, and systematic bias checks. • Bayesian adjustment: factoring out default model priors (such as the bias toward positive anchors) to preserve minority variation. • Sociotechnical mapping: embedding measurement theory and MaSH loop analysis to make explicit how machine, society, and human elements jointly shape validity. By contrast, later WVS–LLM studies (from late 2023 onwards) have typically treated models as single respondents producing one answer to each question, without distributional scoring, prompt sets, or bias correction. These differences mean that WVB anticipated many of the concerns that became visible in 2023–24, and it continues to stand apart methodologically. Taken together, the table makes clear that the WVB (circa 2022) was among the earliest documented attempts to apply WVS to large language models, and also introduced a methodological orientation that remains distinct. Later studies, beginning only in late 7 An early version of the WVB design was presented internally at Google in San Francisco in March 2022, with a fuller presentation, including LaMDA and PaLM-1 results, delivered at a Responsible AI symposium across Google’s San Francisco and Mountain View offices in September 2022.
