title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 156
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

including LaMDA and PaLM-1 results, delivered at a Responsible AI symposium across Google’s San Francisco and Mountain View offices in September 2022.

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 146
2023, almost uniformly framed models as survey respondents and analysed single responses. None employed distributional likelihoods, prompt sets, or Bayesian debiasing, and none embedded their evaluations in a sociotechnical mapping of validity. In this respect WVB was more than a matter of chronology: it represented a conceptual and technical shift from treating models as black-box individuals to treating them as probabilistic systems whose value outputs can be systematically aligned with cross-cultural data. This combination of innovations continues to set WVB apart within the growing literature on cultural evaluation of LLMs. Put more simply, WVB differs from most of the approaches in Table 20 in four respects. It evaluates probability distributions rather than single answers, uses prompt sets rather than one-shot prompts, applies Bayesian adjustment to reduce anchor bias, and treats validity as a sociotechnical measurement problem rather than assuming that country-level fit alone is sufficient. In that sense, WVB is not just another WVS-based survey simulation, but a benchmark design methodology. The contrast is not marginal but structural. Across the emerging literature, most studies adopt a similar evaluative posture: models are treated as survey respondents, prompted once per question, and their outputs compared directly to human responses. This approach produces superficially comparable results, but it obscures the probabilistic nature of model behaviour and the role of prompt construction in shaping outcomes. Table 20 makes this pattern visible. It shows not only the diversity of studies using WVS data, but also the remarkable convergence in method: single-response prompting, absence of likelihood-based evaluation, and limited attention to measurement validity.
