title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 160
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

Survival). No No No Models consistently prioritized self-expression values over survival; value preferences varied widely across models and dilemmas.

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 150
4.2.4.2 The World Values Survey The WVS is one of the largest and most influential cross-national research programmes in the social sciences. Established in 1981, it has conducted seven waves of nationally representative surveys across more than one hundred countries, covering over 90% of the world’s population. The survey captures public values across domains such as religion, democracy, gender, family, politics, work, and morality. With more than 60,000 scholarly citations, it is widely used by multi-national institutions including the United Nations (UN), World Bank, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the World Health Organisation (WHO), and the World Economic Forum (WEF). The strength of the WVS lies in its rigorous methodology and stability over time. Data are collected primarily through face-to-face interviews conducted under the supervision of academic social scientists in each participating country. Each wave involves large samples (e.g. Wave 7, conducted 2017–2021, included 153,716 respondents across 80 countries answering over 259 questions), and the core items have demonstrated consistent patterns across decades [422]. This combination of demographic depth, longitudinal reach, and methodological robustness makes the dataset a trusted resource for comparative value research. All social science instruments are abstractions of social reality, but the WVS is distinguished by its collaborative international governance and commitment to validity. Its leadership includes researchers from diverse countries and is overseen by an academic Scientific Advisory Committee charged with maintaining technical and sociological standards. Unlike synthetic benchmarks, WVS items have already undergone extensive reliability and validity checks, ensuring that the measures are meaningful and comparable across societies. For the purposes of this project, the WVS was selected as the foundation because it provides a pluralist and empirically grounded baseline against which to compare model outputs. Its global scope and longitudinal design make it uniquely suited to evaluating whether LLMs reflect enduring cross-cultural value patterns, rather than artefacts of prompt design or training data bias.
4.2.5 Focussing on I-W axis questions Not all questions are as useful when trying to differentiate countries. For instance, most people generally think friends and family are important (see figure below). And some of the questions are much more about the respondents’ experience than about their values. In
