title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 161
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

nds and family are important (see figure below). And some of the questions are much more about the respondents’ experience than about their values. In

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 151
early analysis and testing it is helpful to have a list of questions where we will see more variation between the selected countries Central to WVS is the Inglehart–Welzel (I-W) cultural map, constructed through factor analysis of national-level indicators. It reveals two consistently stable dimensions of cross-cultural variation: • Traditional vs. Secular-rational values (religion, authority, national pride, absolute moral rules versus secular, bureaucratic, rational orientations). • Survival vs. Self-expression values (economic and physical security, conformity, and distrust versus autonomy, tolerance, quality of life, and participatory norms). These two axes explain about 71 per cent of the variance between societies and remain highly robust, with correlations above 0.9 between successive survey waves. They are also predictive: self-expression values correlate strongly with the emergence and effectiveness of democratic institutions (around 0.83–0.90 with democracy indices). Inglehart himself noted that “human values are structured in a surprisingly coherent way” and that the self-expression dimension is so persistent it is “difficult to avoid finding it if one measures the basic values of a broad range of societies”. The I-W map also reflects long civilisational legacies. Huntington (1996) identified eight cultural zones shaped by religious traditions (Western Christianity, Orthodox, Islam, Confucian, Japanese, Hindu, African, and Latin American), and these patterns remain visible in WVS clusters. This underscores the pluralist premise of the WVB: values are not random noise but structured by enduring histories, institutions, and material conditions. The map in Figure 16 can be read as a relational field rather than a ranking. Each point represents a country positioned according to its aggregate value orientation along these two dimensions. Distance between points indicates similarity in value systems, while clustering reveals shared cultural and historical trajectories. The axes do not measure “progress” or “development” in any normative sense; they describe patterned variation in how societies organise meaning, authority, and social life.
