title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 165
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ty arises from relations between tools, settings, and interpretations, not a single metric, we make these relations explicit via a sociotechnical map.

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 155
4.2.7 Sociotechnical mapping of evaluation Why a sociotechnical map? Measurement theory tells us how to link constructs, operationalisations and indicators; sociotechnical theory reminds us that evaluation is never purely technical. Vallor’s [403, 404] virtue-ethical account makes this move explicit: under conditions of acute technosocial opacity, technologies and moral practices co-evolve, so ethical clarity cannot come from a single metric. Mapping must therefore show how tools, practices, values, and institutions co-constitute one another; otherwise we risk the kind of “false moral clarity” Vallor warns about, where complex evaluative choices are flattened into neat scores [404]. Benchmarks are enacted within what I call Machine–Society–Human (MaSH) loops: technical choices (models, datasets, prompts, metrics) interact with social worlds (laws, ideologies, media, inequalities, histories) and human agents (designers, annotators, users). Following early sociotechnical systems work [117, 395] I treat each evaluation as a map of relationships, not a standalone instrument. This lets us read validity in context: do our measures make sense given the system they sit within, and where do values enter the loop? In practice, I found that drawing the map first changed what I looked for. The “hidden” normative assumptions stopped hiding once they were placed on a diagram and labelled as such. Engineers I worked with at Google in 2022 confirmed this: sociotechnical maps gave them a new lens for seeing how their design choices smuggled in normative commitments, and how to make those explicit.
Figure 17: A sociotechnical map showing how evaluations of AI models relate to both the social system and the technical model. Sociotechnical is a trending word in AI communities; however, the word is often diluted from its origins. The field of sociotechnical systems was initially developed in the 1950s as an examination of the social upheavals caused by the mechanisation of coal extraction [117, 395]. Its original purpose was precisely to map relationships between
