title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 166
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ion of the social upheavals caused by the mechanisation of coal extraction [117, 395]. Its original purpose was precisely to map relationships between

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 156
technical and social components, showing how validity depends on those relations rather than any single metric Recent work in fairness and AI governance converges on this view: validity and fairness are properties of sociotechnical systems, not standalone models: The Model Cards framework [267], Datasheets for Datasets [145], The US developed National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) AI Risk Management Framework, Data Statements for Natural Language Processing (NLP) [8], and the HELM benchmark [229] all push toward more contextualised evaluations, but they remain narrative or tabular artefacts. “The current lack of consensus on robust and verifiable measurement methods … [means] measurement approaches can be oversimplified, gamed, lack critical nuance, become relied upon in unexpected ways, or fail to account for differences in affected groups and contexts” The US NIST AI Risk Management Framework (2023) [8] Our contribution is distinct. To my knowledge, no one has taken the further step of using a diagrammatic sociotechnical mapping protocol to locate validity checks on specific nodes and edges of an evaluation system. By turning validity from a checklist into a relational map, this method makes hidden assumptions visible and contestable and creates a replicable tool that practitioners can use to interrogate their own benchmarks. This is a methodological innovation in AI evaluation design and represents a direct contribution of this thesis. 4.2.7.1 Avenues of bias Bias is best understood as a systemic property of the MaSH loop. It does not arise from training data alone but is continually introduced across multiple channels, which a sociotechnical map makes visible: from the world-views built into pre-prompts, to the assumptions embedded in answer-anchor design, to the tacit judgments of annotators. • Training data: provenance, coverage, and curation choices shape the baseline worldview. • Goals and tasks: what is framed as the model’s purpose encodes priorities about what matters. • Architecture & tokenization: representational and modelling choices can privilege certain forms, registers, or languages. • Guardrails & system prompts: framing, pre-prompts (“world-views”), and answer anchors systematically nudge outputs. • Fine-tuning regimes (RLHF/RLAIF/Constitutional AI): annotator choices or constitutions encode normative judgments. • Prompts: lexical choices, ordering, and cultural registers affect how responses are elicited.
