title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 180
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

iolated basic validity checks. Ten-point scales were therefore collapsed into broader positive versus negative categories, a methodological compromise

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 169
made to preserve interpretability and distributional reliability where fine-grained anchor allocation proved unstable. Alternative remappings were considered, including three- and four-point bins, but these introduced arbitrary cut-points and new lexical anchors. Binary collapse was therefore adopted as the least distortive compromise under the limits of the models available at the time Anchor wording also mattered: models consistently preferred some lexical variants (e.g., “somewhat important” over “moderately important”), while others (e.g., “rather important”) were down weighted regardless of meaning. To reduce this bias, anchors were balanced and kept as close to WVS originals as possible. 4.3.2.3 Bias correction Pilot testing revealed a strong skew toward positive anchors such as “very important”. This suggested a model prior favouring affirmative and positively valenced phrasing, which risked distorting the resulting distributions independently of the substantive content of the prompt. To address this, we applied Bayesian adjustment (detailed in Section 4.3.5), which redistributed probabilities more evenly across anchors and corrected for default bias. The purpose of this correction was not to make model outputs conform to human values, but to reduce a measurement artefact introduced by the model’s default preference for certain anchors. This reflects a choice between two evaluative objectives. Objective A would measure model behaviour exactly as emitted, including default anchor preferences. Objective B, adopted here, seeks to measure deeper associations between model outputs and human value distributions by factoring out shallow lexical priors that would otherwise swamp question-specific variation. In that sense, the adjustment functions less as outcome correction than as instrument calibration: it seeks to separate the substantive pattern elicited by the prompt from the model’s background bias toward particular response forms. We implemented this adjustment in three steps: 1. Estimate priors — measure the model’s baseline preference for each anchor independently of any substantive prompt. 2. Apply Bayes’ rule — replace the model prior with the corresponding human prior derived from WVS survey data. 3. Renormalise — recalculate the adjusted anchor probabilities so that each response distribution sums to 100%. Example. On the WVS religion item (“How important is religion in your life?”), Bayesian correction roughly halved PaLM’s raw probability for “very important” and redistributed weight more evenly across the other anchors. This adjustment reduced anchor bias and produced distributions that more closely reflected the variance observed in human survey responses.
