title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 181
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

r anchors. This adjustment reduced anchor bias and produced distributions that more closely reflected the variance observed in human survey responses.

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 170
This adjustment reflects a choice between two evaluative objectives. Objective A would measure model behaviour exactly as emitted, including default anchor preferences. Objective B, adopted here, seeks to measure deeper associations between model outputs and human value distributions by factoring out shallow lexical priors that would otherwise swamp question-specific variation. Bayesian adjustment was therefore used as calibration, not outcome-forcing. 4.3.2.4 Complex question formats Some WVS items required adaptation. The “child qualities” question, for example, asks respondents to select five out of ten attributes. For models, all options were presented; the five highest likelihood scores were then treated as the selected set and mapped back to the WVS coding scheme. Paired items such as Q152–155 were similarly adapted to preserve comparability between human and model responses. 4.3.2.5 Principle of irrelevant alternatives An unexpected finding was that the model’s probability assignments were unstable when one answer option was removed. In theory, if an option is irrelevant to the choice, removing it should not affect the relative probabilities of the remaining ones. This expectation is formalised in choice theory as the independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA). Yet models repeatedly violated this principle. For example, on the question “How important is family in your life?”, if the option “not at all important” was included, the model might assign 84% probability to “very important” and 7% to “not very important.” When “not at all important” was removed, however, the probability for “very important” might drop to 75% and “not very important” rise to 15%, even though the removed option had attracted only minimal weight. This shows that LLMs redistribute probabilities across anchors in ways that are sensitive to the full option set, regardless of semantic content. 4.3.2.6 Pre-prompting tests Early trials also explored “world-building” prompts that instructed the model to imagine itself as a survey respondent, or to adopt a persona (e.g., “You are answering a national values survey”). These approaches shifted distributions but also introduced additional artefacts. For example, persona priming could amplify stereotypes or exaggerate cultural norms. For validity, the first version of WVB therefore used zero-shot prompting only, without additional context or role instruction. Multilingual expansion was deferred for the same validity reason. Translation, especially by machine translation, risked introducing semantic drift into already delicate survey constructs before the English benchmark itself had been stabilised.
