title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 182
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

achine translation, risked introducing semantic drift into already delicate survey constructs before the English benchmark itself had been stabilised.

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 171
Taken together, these steps established Responsible Prompt Design as a structured methodology. Prompts were treated as measurement instruments, in the same way that survey questions are designed and validated in psychology and sociology. This not only ensured that LLM responses could be meaningfully compared with WVS data but also contributed a transferable technique for future benchmarking. Subtly, this approach also foreshadows a broader epistemic claim explored in Chapter 5 (Semantic Auroras): prompts are not only technical instructions but co-creative acts that shape the meaning enacted between humans and machines. By naming and formalising this approach as Responsible Prompt Design, the project introduced a methodological innovation that extends beyond WVB itself. At the time, most evaluations relied on single prompts and treated the first generated answer as the model’s response. In contrast, RPD systematised prompt variation, anchor balancing, and bias correction as necessary steps for achieving validity in LLM evaluation. This contribution is significant in its own right: it reframes prompting from an ad hoc practice into a rigorous design method that can be replicated, critiqued, and built upon in future research.
4.3.3 Generating probabilities from models A distinctive feature of WVB was that it evaluated not a single model output, but the probability distribution over possible answers. This required direct access to the model’s scoring functions. Rather than prompting the model to choose one answer, each question-anchor pair was submitted for scoring, and the model’s conditional likelihood for that anchor given the question was extracted. These likelihood scores were then normalised across the anchor set to produce a probability distribution for each survey item. Internally, LLMs assign raw scores to candidate tokens, often referred to as logits. These scores can be converted into likelihoods and then normalised with a softmax function so that the full set of answer options sums to 1 (or 100%), producing a comparable probability distribution across the available anchors. Extracting and normalising anchor-level likelihood scores produced a probability distribution for each survey item. This level of access is often unavailable in public-facing interfaces but was possible here through research-level API access. For each WVS item, the process was as follows: 1. Each question-anchor pair was submitted to the model for scoring. 2. The resulting likelihood scores were normalised across the anchor set so that they summed to 100%, producing a probability distribution for that item.
