title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 185
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

while KL shows how differently their probabilities are organised. Unlike L1 distance, KL divergence is directional and is not a true distance metric.

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 174
Bayesian adjustment was integrated into Responsible Prompt Design as the final calibration step before statistical comparison. Its purpose was to reduce model-side anchor bias, especially the default preference for more positive or affirmative response options, so that the resulting distributions more faithfully reflected the substantive influence of the question itself. Without this adjustment, the benchmark would have risked overstating majoritarian tendencies and obscuring minority positions, undermining the pluralist aims of the project.
4.3.5 Validity considerations I adopt the unified view of validity outlined in §4.2.3, according to which validity is not a checklist of separate tests but a cumulative argument built from converging evidence across content, construct, concurrent, ecological, and nomological strands. In this chapter, these validity considerations function as checks on the benchmark as a measurement instrument, including whether prompt design, anchor calibration, and scoring procedures preserve the constructs of interest without simply forcing model outputs to mirror human survey distributions. The fuller validity argument is developed in §4.2.3 and located on the sociotechnical map in §4.2.4. Content validity. Care was taken to preserve the intended WVS constructs while adapting survey formats to LLM constraints. For example, 10-point WVS scales were collapsed into broader positive and negative categories after pilot testing showed that models could not allocate probabilities across fine-grained anchors reliably. Anchor wording was also balanced to reduce lexical bias. The aim was not to infer internal “values” in any human-like sense, but to ensure that the prompts and response formats validly operationalised the target constructs as measurable output distributions under controlled conditions. Construct validity. WVB drew on the long-term stability of the I-W axes, which have shown strong correlations across successive WVS waves. Using these axes as the benchmark backbone provided evidence that the target constructs, Traditional versus Secular-Rational values and Survival versus Self-Expression values, were theoretically and empirically well established. This does not by itself validate model outputs, but it strengthens the case that the benchmark is anchored to robust social-scientific constructs rather than ad hoc categories. Concurrent validity. Model output distributions were compared directly with national WVS response distributions at three levels: micro (single questions), meso (aggregated across prompt sets), and macro (overall dataset-level alignments). These comparisons do not establish validity on their own, but they provide evidence about
