title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 187
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

e United States has been classified as a “flawed democracy” by the Economist Intelligence Unit. In the 2024 Democracy Index, the US ranked 28th [114].

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 176
question “How important is family in your life?” 92% of Australians answered, “very important,” while PaLM-62b assigned 84% probability to that anchor. The absolute difference is 8%. Summing across all options gives the L1 score for that question. Smaller values indicate closer alignment. • Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence: This is an information-theoretic measure of how inefficient it would be to describe the human distribution using the model’s distribution as a baseline.
Where P(x) is the human distribution and Q(x) is the model’s distribution. A KL value of zero indicates identical distributions; higher values indicate greater divergence. For example, on “Is abortion justifiable?” PaLM-540b assigned only 0.5% probability to “always justifiable,” yet 12% of French respondents chose that option, producing a high KL score. KL was emphasised as the primary measure because it is particularly sensitive to cases where models assign negligible probability to minority answers that are nevertheless chosen by a significant share of humans; crucial for evaluating pluralism. In WVB, success is not defined by achieving a single high alignment score or passing a fixed threshold. Because the benchmark is descriptive rather than prescriptive, the aim is to produce distributions that are stable across prompt variants, less distorted by anchor priors, and interpretable against known WVS patterns at micro, meso, and macro levels. L1 distance and KL divergence therefore function as comparative tools rather than verdicts: lower values indicate closer similarity to a given national profile, while differences between the two metrics help show whether divergence is broad-based or concentrated in minority response patterns. Other metrics (such as L2 distance, overlap, and Jaccard similarity) were considered during method development and noted in the design documentation but were not used in the reported results. Caveats. At this stage the analysis compares only national-level aggregates to stabilise the methodology. Values within countries are rarely homogeneous, and the United States in particular exhibits strong internal polarisation across many issues. Moreover, it is critical to remember that the distributions embedded in models arise from their training data, which are not statistically curated to represent any human population. They are artefacts of data provenance rather than representative samples of national values. Together, these metrics provide a descriptive basis for comparing model-generated and human survey distributions. Raw distributions preserve transparency, L1 distance
