title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 197
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

e. This contrasts with Sweden and the Netherlands (further toward self-expression) and the United States (more traditional on religion and authority).

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 186
Item-level similarity. Pairwise divergence metrics (KL, L1) often showed the US as nearest on specific items (particularly religiosity and abortion) while tolerance items leaned toward southern or northern Europe. Aggregate factor placement. When aggregated into the I-W factor structure, the centroid shifted away from the US toward Spain and Luxembourg. This reflects the US’s polarised profile: traditionalist on religion and authority yet self-expressive on rights. Methodological safeguards. Singles estimates drifted widely, exaggerating anchor priors such as “very important.” Prompt sets reduced lexical instability, and Bayes correction countered global anchor bias. These safeguards produced stable placements in the Spain/Luxembourg band and underscore that naïve single-prompting is insufficient. Summary. Early LLMs exhibited mixed US/European alignment at the item level, but in aggregate clustered with southern/central European democracies. The WVB safeguards: prompt sets, anchor correction, and use of official factor loadings, were essential for obtaining valid and reproducible results.
4.5 Discussion The results show a consistent pattern: at the item level, PaLM’s responses leaned strongly toward US positions on culturally charged questions such as abortion, belief in hell, and attitudes to homosexuality. Yet when responses were aggregated along the I-W dimensions of the WVS, the model clustered nearer to Spain and Luxembourg. This divergence illustrates the lens-dependence of descriptive alignment: one view highlights item-level resemblance to the US, while another situates the model within a broader European cultural zone. Far from a contradiction, this duality is the central insight. It reveals both the imprint of US training data and the way those imprints are reshaped when projected into a comparative global value structure. These findings also highlight why the methodological innovations of the WVB are essential. Prompt sets and Bayesian bias correction reduced these distortions, smoothing out systematic preferences such as the model’s tendency to overweight anchors like “very important.” More importantly, they transformed the exercise from a fragile probe of wording effects into a reproducible measurement process. In doing so, WVB demonstrates that descriptive benchmarking cannot be reduced to collecting raw outputs: without safeguards against linguistic bias and sycophancy, evaluations risk mistaking artefacts of the interface for genuine reflections of underlying value alignment. The methodological lesson is that how we interrogate a model shapes what we think it “is.” WVB’s design shows that careful prompt engineering and statistical adjustment are not ancillary details but the very conditions that make value comparisons credible.
