title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 198
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ows that careful prompt engineering and statistical adjustment are not ancillary details but the very conditions that make value comparisons credible.

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 187
4.5.1 Methodological significance The results show why the methodological safeguards of the WVB are essential. Naïve single-prompt testing amplified prompt sensitivity and anchor bias; skewing apparent similarity to US responses. Prompt sets reduced this instability, and Bayesian anchor correction countered model biases toward positive anchors such as “very important.” This progression demonstrates that methodological design is not optional; without it, evaluations risk misplacing models or mischaracterising their value alignments. By reframing evaluation as mapping rather than judging, the WVB avoids the naturalistic fallacy (deriving “ought” from “is”). Instead, it offers a descriptive account of how models reflect the distributions embedded in their training data and interaction design. This approach directly addresses the flaws in earlier evaluation instruments, which embed normative assumptions about which values count as correct. Where those prescriptive benchmarks embodied functionalist assumptions and narrow cultural definitions of intelligence or commonsense, the WVB offers a descriptive, pluralist alternative grounded in external human data.
4.5.2 Philosophical implications The WVB also clarifies what LLMs are and what they are not. Models are not moral agents. They are better understood as moral zombies: systems that produce outputs which simulate moral reasoning but lack subjective intentionality. They can “point” at something in interaction, but this purposiveness is instrumental rather than agential. They are, in the philosophical sense, qualia zombies: capable of producing behaviour indistinguishable from moral discourse, but without subjective experience or ethical intent. Recognising this distinction is critical. Treating models as if they were moral agents risks mis-attributing responsibility to machines. Instead, the WVB shows that they are epistemic artefacts: their value reflections arise from patterns in training data, not from any internal moral compass. This strengthens the argument that responsibility lies with the designers, evaluation designers, deployers, and governors of these systems.
4.5.3 Governance and participatory use By framing results descriptively, the WVB shifts moral choices out of the sole purview of technology companies and machine learning communities. Instead of deciding internally what values a model should reflect, companies can present a transparent snapshot of model alignments and then partner with stakeholders (i.e. policymakers, social scientists, and impacted communities) to deliberate on whether those alignments are appropriate for specific contexts.
