title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 199
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ders (i.e. policymakers, social scientists, and impacted communities) to deliberate on whether those alignments are appropriate for specific contexts.

Chapter 4: The World Values Benchmark 188
This opens space for more democratic and participatory governance. For example, on highly contested issues such as reproductive rights in the US, a descriptive benchmark can reveal whether a model disproportionately reflects one cultural standpoint. Rather than the company unilaterally deciding whether that is acceptable, descriptive evidence can be handed to stakeholders who can collectively determine whether, and how, tuning is needed for deployment. The usefulness of the WVB therefore extends along three dimensions: • Descriptive: revealing the values and biases embedded in model outputs. • Comparative: showing how models align differently across the countries and populations in which they may be deployed. • Relational: situating these outputs within broader MaSH Loops, where technical choices, social contexts, and human values co-produce outcomes. This relational dimension is the chapter’s clearest link back to MaSH Loops. WVB should not be read as detecting values stored inside the model. It samples how value-laden tendencies are enacted under controlled interactional conditions and then situates those tendencies against human social distributions. WVB is not a moral truth detector, not a measure of model agency, and not a representative sample of human values embedded in the model. It is a descriptive instrument for comparing model-output distributions with selected human survey distributions under specified prompting conditions. The methodology presented here is another tool to add to our arsenal to better understand how these artefacts are driven by and reflect our social systems. In sum, the WVB shows that PaLM, an early LLM, reflected US value patterns on sensitive individual items, yet when mapped onto broader cultural dimensions it clustered closer to southern and central Europe. This duality underscores that alignment depends on the lens of analysis and that models should be treated not as moral agents but as descriptive mirrors of their data and design. The contribution of WVB lies in offering a transparent and reproducible method for situating models against established social-science baselines, allowing their value reflections to be seen with greater clarity and contested where needed.
