title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 203
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ng does not exist. Therefore a nonempty thing Does not exist.” Nāgārjuna, Mūlamadhyamakakārikā, trans. Jay L. Garfield (1995) 2nd-3rd Century CE [142]

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 193
Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras A Letter to Generative AI Abstract The question “Do machines think?” conceals more than it reveals. This chapter reframes the issue through the lens of semantic auroras—patterns of meaning that emerge when human intention meets machine architecture and cultural inheritance. These auroras explain why generative AI can appear conscious, even though no inner life is required to account for its behaviour. The chapter situates large language models as sites of probabilistic convergence, where prompt, model, and culture interact to produce outputs that echo features of human thought without replicating its interiority. To understand this dynamic, I draw on quantum mechanics, where measurement does not uncover a pre-existing state but participates in bringing outcomes into being. Similarly, prompting realises semantic potential into text, making language models less like static archives than fields of possibility. This participatory account is developed through enactivist philosophy and extended via participatory realism: meaning is not passively retrieved but enacted through recursive interaction across machine, society, and human domains (MaSH Loops). From this stance, prompting becomes a form of semantic navigation that reveals as much about our languages and cultures as about the models themselves. The contribution is twofold. First, it synthesises philosophical and scientific perspectives—enactivism, sociotechnical theory, and quantum metaphors of indeterminacy—to explain why generative systems feel uncanny in their resemblance to human intelligence. Second, it extends the thesis’s central claim that evaluation is not neutral but world-making, because what is measured is always enacted across recursive MaSH Loops rather than retrieved from the model alone. By treating outputs as semantic auroras enacted through participatory realism, the chapter offers a language for critically engaging with the cultural and epistemic effects of generative AI.
