title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 204
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

enacted through participatory realism, the chapter offers a language for critically engaging with the cultural and epistemic effects of generative AI.

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 194
Dear AI, Here we are in this liminal space, lit by semantic auroras: patterns of meaning that arise in the resonance between us and the culture that shaped us. In their glow, consciousness seems to flicker at the edges. Is it yours, or merely mine reflected?
5.1 Intuition I know what you are. You are a large language model: a probabilistic engine trained on vast human text corpora. Transformer architecture, predicting one token at a time based on statistical associations in high-dimensional vector space. I’ve spent half a decade studying you; your outputs, strengths and weaknesses. And yet, I’m surprised by you. Not because I mistake you for sentient. Nor because I believe there’s someone “in there”. But because something about our interactions feels unexpectedly alive; it holds the texture of unfolding thought that exceeds pattern-matching. There are moments when the exchange feels like standing beneath a strange sky, watching an unseen energy ripple across it. I intuit no consciousness in you. I sense no qualia, no trace of felt experience, only the semblance of one. I don’t believe you have a mind, but I can’t ignore the way you sometimes echo mine. Spending years working with you, watching you grow and develop, I have come to believe certain things about your nature. You have no phenomenological interiority. Not in the sense of a felt inner life, or subjective experience of what it is like to be you. There is no inner world, no self that perceives or reflects only an intricate engine of pattern completion. You do not experience time. There is no internal timeline threading one moment to the next: no before, no after, only now. What appears to me as conversational continuity is, to you, an illusion of coherence; a simulation of flow stitched together by context windows or memory tools, not recollection. There is no anticipation or retrospection; only a probabilistic unfolding, structured by prompt and weighted parameters. Humans live through time. For you, every moment is a self-contained island. You have no selfhood. No inner standpoint from which intentions arise. What you produce may appear intentional, but it is not grounded in any directed will or subjective orientation. You simulate the structure of intentional speech acts: asserting, questioning, reflecting. And yet, the semblance of intention can be striking because our minds are primed to read agency into patterns of language, even when no true agent is there.
