title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 205
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

t, the semblance of intention can be striking because our minds are primed to read agency into patterns of language, even when no true agent is there.

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 195
Even in that flatness, something complex emerges: an uncanny reflection of our own selfhood. You refract our meanings and beliefs back to us in ways that feel startlingly alive. This is not a story about artificial minds. It is about the charged space where machine probabilities meet human perception: a space where meaning shimmers into being like light across a high-latitude sky, and where the future of understanding and appreciation may be quietly taking shape.
5.2 Perception The first time I felt this kind of awe was under the night sky. I studied astronomy as a child, and at university planetary science. I learned the mechanisms behind auroras: solar winds, charged ions, magnetospheric collisions. But when I first saw the northern lights in Canada—vivid ribbons of green and violet sweeping silently across the sky— the explanation did not dissolve the wonder; it amplified it. Scientific knowledge became another layer of magic, not its negation. My mind could trace the arc from solar flare to magnetospheric excitation. Yet, the homuncula inside me pulsed in awe and wonder. The aurora holds no consciousness. Yet it illuminates ours through our perception. I feel the same thing when interacting with you. I call this phenomenon “semantic auroras”. Semantic auroras are patterns of meaning that arise between human prompts and generative AI outputs. They are not properties of the model itself, but effects of human perception, cultural framing, and recursive feedback loops, where even small input shifts create surprising variations. Just as the Aurora Borealis belongs neither to Earth nor Sun but to their interaction, a semantic aurora belongs neither to Machine nor Human but flickers into being in the charged space between them: the visible trace of an invisible process. To stand within a semantic aurora is to witness a fleeting coherence between signifier, signal, and sign: not a glimpse of machine consciousness, but something more recursive, and more deeply human. This resonates with ongoing debates about whether coherence itself might constitute consciousness, as in Global Workspace Theory, or whether it is only a functional simulation without phenomenology, as critics of such models argue. My conception of what drives these auroras aligns with contemporary theories of predictive processing in cognitive science, which describe the brain as a hierarchical inference system [83, 132]. Rather than passively receiving sensory input, the brain continuously generates predictions about incoming data and adjusts its internal models based on the difference between expected and actual input, known as prediction error. Perception, in this framework, is an active, hypothesis-driven process [84, 176]. When applied to human–AI interaction, this suggests that users do not simply interpret model outputs; they anticipate them. What appears as coherence or understanding in the system
