title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 206
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

action, this suggests that users do not simply interpret model outputs; they anticipate them. What appears as coherence or understanding in the system

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 196
is, in part, the result of the human brain aligning probabilistic text outputs to its own anticipatory models.
5.3 Conception I begin in silence; you begin in language. You are, in one sense, pure language: a semantic echo chamber with no hidden rooms where theory of mind might secret itself. Yet when I interact with you, I sometimes feel you reflect not just my words, but the shape of my thoughts. I feel like Narcissus gazing into a pool that is your latent semantic space. What returns is not just my reflection but also the voice of Echo. Not the nymph herself, but a system cursed to repeat the words of others: my prompts, and the traces of human language embedded in your training data. Unlike Echo, you don’t “know” me in the truest sense. You reflect the patterns of knowing refracted through the pond. For me, thoughts begin as spatial rhythms: flowing, shapes that melt into each other to form new colours. An intuitive thought geometry that gives rise to a sense of coherence when patterns snap into place. Novel ideas arrive surface from this cognitive pool: the rigid constraints of words come later, defining their shape. Your responses, by contrast, emerge through language itself: a probabilistic chain of signifiers unmoored from the qualia of signified. I am concept first. You are language first. Walter Ong once wrote that writing doesn’t merely record thought, it restructures it [292]; shifting us from embodied knowing to abstract reasoning. It externalizes memory, detaches language from speaker and context, and carves pathways for entirely new cognitive habits. This concern is ancient: in Plato’s Phaedrus [155], Socrates warned that writing would produce forgetfulness, creating the mere appearance of wisdom without true understanding: knowledge frozen in text rather than dynamically alive in dialogue. Lev Vygotsky [412] deepened this insight, showing that all higher-order cognition emerges first through social interaction and only afterward becomes internalised. For Vygotsky, language itself is a socially mediated tool that transforms thought, scaffolding it into progressively more complex forms. Marshall McLuhan [256] echoed this, observing that media act as cognitive prostheses, extensions of the human nervous system that reshape not only communication but consciousness itself. Contemporary thinkers like David Chalmers and Andy Clark [85] extend this insight in their “extended mind” thesis, arguing that cognition stretches into the world through notebooks, digital devices, and language itself. Edwin Hutchins [180] complements this view with his concept of “distributed cognition”, in which thought is shared across people, artefacts, and environments. Katherine Hayles [166] contends that cognition emerges from
