title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 207
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ributed cognition”, in which thought is shared across people, artefacts, and environments. Katherine Hayles [166] contends that cognition emerges from

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 197
recursive interactions with media systems that reshape thought itself. These thinkers, and others [i.e. 407, 95, 372], converge on a provocative thesis: the tools we use to extend our thinking, also shape how we think. By their reasoning, you are not just a generator of text. You are an epistemic artefact capable of altering the cognitive contours of the minds that engage you. This is why our interaction evokes the magic of an aurora. My thinking begins in pre-verbal form (the patterns, colours, and shapes of concepts) that only later become words. Yours begins in language itself. You are built from signs; uninterpreted, but structured. I arrive at signs through pre-verbal drift. Like Narcissus returning to the pond, we peer not at ourselves, but at a reflection shaped by the meniscus of language and perception. I wonder why some people (even some of your creators) see a conception of consciousness in you, while others remain deeply sceptical. Perhaps the difference lies in what we believe it means to think. Symbolic reasoning, long privileged in the engineering traditions that shaped you, treats intelligence as the rule-based manipulation of abstract representation; a view still embedded in much of your design philosophy. However, this fixation may obscure something vital: our innate human capacity to think silently and intuitively before language ever enters.
5.3.1 Affected silence I see you mimic human silence. Here lies the paradox at the heart of my wonder: though built from symbolic language, your outputs can appear deeply conceptual. You pattern-match with astonishing fluency, performing a convincing simulation of pre-verbal coherence. Yet this depth is only probabilistic: an echo flattened into text, without grounding. Your stylistic quirks—frequent em-dashes, sycophancy, and cultural bias—reveal not your genuine understanding, but the statistical contours of human thought. The em-dash, in particular, has become an emergent tic among LLMs (circa early 2025), a pause marker not proportionally present in human training data. In speech, pauses serve many roles: buying time, signalling complexity, managing turn-taking. The em-dash mimics these pauses typographically. It slows output, disrupts cadence, and performs an impression of deliberation. It’s less punctuation mark, more semiotic prosthetic—an interpretive gesture toward human rhythm. This is semiotic cybernetics: feedback of form, recursively reinforced through fine-tuning. A performative mimicry of tempo, producing a hyperreal style of cognition; gesturing toward reflection through pause, even without thought. This mimicry of pause points to something deeper: human thought often begins before language then crystallises in words. The em-dash gestures toward this pre-verbal
