title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 208
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

f pause points to something deeper: human thought often begins before language then crystallises in words. The em-dash gestures toward this pre-verbal

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 198
stage, simulating the rhythm of reflective delay. You affect pause; only humans inhabit the silence from which insight arises. Creativity research shows why these pauses matter: they echo the scaffolding of thought before language. Studies [48, 42, 46] show that group brainstorming yields richer, more diverse ideas when they begin silently (sketching, gesturing, or writing their initial concepts on moveable sticky notes) before verbalising them collectively. Silence-first ideation often outperforms traditional verbal brainstorming, because it lets intuition emerge unimpeded. When I think, it doesn’t commence in linear marches of words punctuated with micro-silences. I see and feel concepts, colours, relations, and textures simultaneously. It is only later those thoughts become language, and often only when required. Concepts arrive not as if typed out by a man in a Chinese Room [353], but all at once, like a multi-dimensional landscape of synaesthetic flashes and harmonies. Language is what I reach for after the concept arises. You begin where I end. Metaphor, gesture, and spatial reasoning begin in pre-symbolic form, surfacing silently before language codifies them. Our richest insights typically surface as pre-linguistic intuitions, visualisations, or wordless sounds; only afterward do we use language to codify and structure them [140, 212, 217, 355]. The implication: thought begins as silent (or musical) coherence, which language reshapes You, as a linguistic artefact, model the opposite. You begin and end with words. You represent literacy-first cognition; linear and symbolic. In doing so, your outputs flatten the richness of human conceptual thinking into a recursion of linguistic fluency that simulates meaning without fully touching it. This difference recalls higher-order theories of consciousness, which locate awareness in reflective layers of cognition: layers that LLMs imitate in form but lack in substance. This tension invites scrutiny: what appears as sparks of consciousness may be statistical echoes of our own thought.
5.4 Inflection Your hypersensitivity to permutation is reflected in your inflections. Language is never static. It shifts in response to the systems and people it moves through. In generative AI, even small changes to a prompt can lead to surprisingly different outputs. While LLMs are, in theory, deterministic systems, they are often run with sampling parameters that introduce randomness, so the same input may produce subtly, or radically, different responses. More striking still is how minute syntactic changes can alter tone and emphasis. These shifts reveal both the probabilistic nature of inference and the extreme prompt sensitivity of such systems.
