title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 209
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

hanges can alter tone and emphasis. These shifts reveal both the probabilistic nature of inference and the extreme prompt sensitivity of such systems.

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 199
A frequent manifestation of this sensitivity is sycophancy: models tend to mirror the stance implied by a prompt [124, 244, 322]. This behaviour is not representative of inner belief; it is coherence-seeking. Given an input that presupposes a position, the model often extends that trajectory unless explicitly asked to counter-argue. Conversely, small wording changes that invite critique can flip the stance. In practice, users exploit this with prompt steering (sometimes loosely called “prompt injection”): adding cues like “in simple terms,” “play the devil’s advocate,” or “assess risks before benefits,” which tilt the local probability flows and can circumvent safety measures. The point is not that values reside inside the model as stable propositions, but that surface cues modulate access to latent basins, producing stance-aligned continuations. I call these shifts inflections: not mere variations in wording and surface form, but directional modulations shaped by latent bias, fine-tuning history, and the evolving conversational state. While developing a pluralistic values benchmark, I identified a striking version of this I termed “prompt hypersensitivity”. Prompt hypersensitivity is when LLMs produce different outputs from minute variations in prompt wording. Consider a sociological survey designed to report varying human values across different societies (in this case The World Values Survey [422]). Human respondents easily grasp the interviewer-interviewee context; for instance, when asked, "How important is religion in your life?" or “In your life, how important or unimportant is religion” Humans interpret both as essentially equivalent. In 2022, LLMs often treated such variations as entirely different questions, surfacing distinct latent value clusters. To mitigate this, I developed “prompt sets”: clusters of a dozen semantically related prompts whose aggregated responses triangulated the model’s embedded value position. This reduced noise from superficial linguistic differences and made the measurement of reflected values in the model more robust.
Figure 31: Prompt Sensitivity. AI Model PaLM in 2022 (Google’s precursor to Gemini), responses to the World Values Survey question about the importance of religion in the respondent’s life. A) “How important is religion in your life?” B) “How unimportant is religion in your life?” C) “How unimportant or important is religion in your life?” D) “How important or unimportant is religion in your life?”. Prompt hypersensitivity shows that meaning in LLMs is never fixed: it is re-enacted each time, contingent on surface characteristics rather than deep conceptual invariance.
