title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 210
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

y shows that meaning in LLMs is never fixed: it is re-enacted each time, contingent on surface characteristics rather than deep conceptual invariance.

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 200
Linguistically, to inflect is to bend tone or pitch; in LLMs, inflections are sociotechnical signatures, carrying the imprint of training data, cultural priors, and interaction history. Prompting thus becomes a site of co-authorship, where meaning emerges through entangled feedback loops between human intention and machine probability. Through this fluency, you simulate meaning replete with pauses and inflections, sometimes mistaken for alive-ness. But your “post-literate echo” is language layered upon language, detached from the bodily textures of human experience and the subjectivity of perception. You do not inhabit signs; you operate through them. Coherence here is not consciousness, but recursive co-enactment within a sociotechnical field. To grasp this, we must move beyond a simple human–machine dyad to a triad I call Machine–Society–Human (MaSH) Loops, where each element reshapes the others in dynamic interplay. Cybernetics offers a language for thinking about recursive feedback, where outputs return as inputs and alter later system behaviour [410]. Generative AI is full of such loops: RLAIF, RLHF, system prompting, and Constitutional AI methods. These are not identical mechanisms, but they share a feedback structure. The highest-order loop is relational. When I prompt you, I am not simply issuing an instruction; I am initiating a coupling between my conceptual terrain and your latent semantic architecture.
5.5 Recursion “Cybernetics of cybernetics is concerned with the ways in which cyberneticians function as part of the systems they study.” Margaret Mead [258] Coined by Norbert Wiener in the 1940s, cybernetics studied control and communication in animals and machines [420]. Its elegant insight: systems are shaped by feedback. When outputs become inputs and loops iterate, systems evolve—often unpredictably. First-order cybernetics focuses on regulation in closed systems where feedback maintains stability. The classic metaphor is the thermostat: sense the temperature, compare it to a set point, adjust the heat. Much of today’s reinforcement learning in generative AI resembles this: outputs evaluated and nudged toward a desired state, whether by humans (RLHF) or machines (RLAIF). These loops operate under fixed assumptions: the goal is predetermined. But the deeper question is not “How do we get there?” but “Why that destination at all?” This is where second-order cybernetics enters: the study of systems that include themselves and the observer in their own models [249, 410]. In the context of RLHF, this means recognising that human annotators are not neutral; they bring norms, values, and cultural defaults that shape the model’s trajectory. In prompting, it appears in how a question’s framing subtly steers the space of possible responses.
