title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 211
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ltural defaults that shape the model’s trajectory. In prompting, it appears in how a question’s framing subtly steers the space of possible responses.

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 201
Third-order cybernetics widens the aperture again, bringing into focus the broader social and institutional contexts in which both the machine and its observers are embedded. It asks how norms and power structures shaping observers themselves enter system dynamics. In this view, reflexivity is not limited to individuals but includes collective processes such as policy standards, governance structures, and cultural narratives that recursively shape both what is observed and how meaning is constructed. Examples include Constitutional AI [22], where human values are codified into model behaviours, and AI policy sandboxes, where regulators, developers, or communities iteratively test systems before deployment. These sandboxes enable policies and system behaviours to co-evolve through structured feedback loops across technical, social, and institutional layers. Table 24 uses loop-learning as a practical gloss on this distinction: single-loop correction adjusts behaviour within a fixed goal; double-loop reflection questions the assumptions, task design, or reward definitions behind that goal; triple-loop reflection interrogates the wider normative and institutional values that made those goals appear natural in the first place. Table 24: Loop learning examples. Primary Question Thermostat example GenAI example Single Loop Asks if the goal is achieved Is the room at the set temperature? RLHF/RLAIF stabilises behaviour against an objective. Double Loop Questions the assumptions behind the actions Why is the thermostat set to this value? Examines the assumptions behind those rewards: who annotates, with what expertise, under which task design, and whether the task has construct validity. Triple Loop Interrogates the broader governing values Who defines comfort? interrogates the governing values and contexts: whose moral baselines, which jurisdictions, which institutional incentives. Triple-loop reflection matters when models are benchmarked against narrow cultural priors, such as US-centric notions of ‘common sense’ or Silicon Valley assumptions about optimisation and exceptionalism. Reworking a benchmark to use more plural baselines is triple-loop work because it reopens the governing values built into the benchmark itself. A practical corollary is a benchmark design template that records choices at each loop, including construct validity, dataset scope, annotator profile, and reward definitions (see Figure 32). Making these explicit reduces hidden value leakage.
