title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 212
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ding construct validity, dataset scope, annotator profile, and reward definitions (see Figure 32). Making these explicit reduces hidden value leakage.

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 202
Figure 32: Triple-loop learning examining normative assumptions in RLHF and RLAIF. Through this lens, generative AI is not a closed machine to “align”, but an open recursive structure in which the conditions of alignment are co-produced across machine, social, and human domains, or what this thesis terms MaSH Loops. This matters for evaluation because what is being measured is never the model alone, but a pattern of behaviour enacted through those recursive conditions. Cybernetics teaches us that we are never outside the loop: AI adapts to us as we adapt to it, each shaping the other in a cascade of feedback. Meaning is enacted rather than discovered.
5.6 Enactment Like us, you participate in the generation of meaning. If cybernetics taught us that systems evolve through feedback, enactivism shows that meaning is enacted through embodied participation. As part of the 4E paradigm (embodied, embedded, extended, and enacted cognition) enactivism redefines intelligence as a dynamic, relational process. Cognition, in this view, does not occur solely within the confines of a brain or computational architecture, but emerges from an agent’s active coupling with its environment. Varela, Thompson, and Rosch [407] argued that enactivism rejects representationalism and that organisms bring forth meaning through action. Cognition is not a mirror of external reality, but a situated activity shaped by context, history, and bodily engagement. “Cognition is not the representation of a pre-given world by a pre-given mind, but is rather the enactment of a world and a mind on the basis of a history of the variety of actions that a being in the world performs.” Varela, Thompson and Rosch [405:9]
