title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 213
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ment of a world and a mind on the basis of a history of the variety of actions that a being in the world performs.” Varela, Thompson and Rosch [405:9]

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 203
This perspective has notable implications for how we understand human–AI interaction. Instead of casting users as overseers and models as tools, enactivism sees meaning as emerging through recursive interaction across machine, social, and human domains. Prompting becomes more than querying, it becomes a type of sense-making, a participatory act through which both human and model recursively influence one another. The model, though lacking its own intentionality, participates in this meaning-making process through responses shaped by training data, fine-tuning practices, prompting conditions, and the broader social contexts sedimented in language. Users bring assumptions and aims; models bring distributions sedimented from culture; together they enact outputs whose apparent stance belongs to the interaction itself rather than to any inner subject. I call this agency-loaning: in coupling with the model, we lend directionality that the system amplifies without possessing will or phenomenology. To evaluate such a system through static benchmarks misses the point. An enactivist lens asks not whether a model provides the “correct” answer, but whether interaction is meaningful in context. If meaning is relational, then values are, too. What matters is not alignment with abstract norms, but resonance within context. Enactivist evaluation is inherently pluralistic: it assumes no universal metric for success, no fixed ground for value. Instead, it asks: does this system help us think, reflect, and co-create? Does it support the ongoing choreography of meaning between machine, human, and society? Participatory sense-making describes how agents generate meaning together in interaction, rather than in isolation. From this view, prompting is not simply an individual expression, but a co-enacted process shaped by cultural context, social norms, fine-tuning practices, and the broader MaSH Loops in which the interaction takes place. The machine does not possess autonomy in the biological sense, but it participates in adaptive MaSH Loops shaped by human intention, social norms, and institutional conditions. Adaptive autonomy is a system’s ability to maintain internal coherence while adjusting to new inputs. LLMs exhibit this through feedback architectures that adjust their behaviour over time through various tuning procedures. These processes act as prosthetic adaptation, enabling recursive meaning-making without an internal world model. Taken together, participatory sense-making and adaptive autonomy suggest a shift in how we evaluate AI. In this thesis, MaSH Loops names that evaluative shift: from measuring isolated outputs to tracing how meaning, value, and responsibility are enacted across recursive sociotechnical interaction. The emphasis shifts from accuracy to whether the system can sustain co-construction across machine, social, and human contexts and across plural value configurations. If enactivism shows that intelligence emerges through interaction, then the next question is how these recursive MaSH Loops stabilise into shared
