title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 214
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ons. If enactivism shows that intelligence emerges through interaction, then the next question is how these recursive MaSH Loops stabilise into shared

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 204
cultural patterns. The next step is to move from recognising these patterns to actively shaping them; to explore how human–AI collaboration can become a site of co-creation.
5.7 Creation The world’s great philosophies and religions all have something to say about creation. Buddhism is particularly adept at giving insight into co-creation. “Whatever is dependently co-arisen That is explained to be emptiness. That, being a dependent designation, Is itself the middle way. Something that is not dependently arisen, Such a thing does not exist. Therefore a nonempty thing Does not exist.” Nāgārjuna, Mūlamadhyamakakārikā 24:18–19, trans. Jay L. Garfield (1995) [142] Nāgārjuna’s verses define emptiness not as nothingness, but as the absence of inherent essence: all things exist only through conditions and relations. This is the “middle way” between eternalism (believing things exist with fixed, independent nature) and nihilism (believing nothing exists at all). Applied to AI, this perspective reframes meaning and value in generative models as empty: not stored inside the machine, nor illusory, but arising only in dependent relation to prompts, training data, architectures, and cultural contexts. Just as Nāgārjuna insists that nothing exists apart from dependent origination, MaSH Loops show how Machines, Societies, and Humans co-enact meaning through recursive interaction. Nāgārjuna’s insight that nothing exists apart from conditions reframes AI outputs as dependently arisen: cultural artefacts shaped by data, prompts, and human interpretation rather than isolated computations. This recognition resonated with my own experience in 2021, when I began to sense that meaning in AI was never generated alone but always entangled in wider cultural loops. After weeks of working with an early GPT-3 model (in the isolation of a strict 2021 Covid lockdown!) I had a vivid dream. In it, I saw fluid networks of culturally shared concepts embedded in human speech moving through an LLM network. The term that arrived with the dream was “memetic substructures”. A year later I tested this idea with the LaMDA and developed the concept of “memetic alignment” to describe how models propagate culturally embedded value systems. The interaction reinforced what I had begun to suspect: prompting generative AI is not merely linguistic steering, it is cultural activation.
