title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 215
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

systems. The interaction reinforced what I had begun to suspect: prompting generative AI is not merely linguistic steering, it is cultural activation.

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 205
These insights helped crystallise a framework I call Cybernetic MaSH Loops: sociotechnical systems defined by the recursive entanglement of Machines, Societies, and Humans in the loop. Iyad Rahwan’s Society-in-the-Loop (SITL) [319] framework was pivotal in reframing AI governance as a societal negotiation rather than a purely technical optimisation. Its core insight, that the public should be actively “in the loop” to steer AI towards socially desirable outcomes, has shaped much of the participatory governance discourse. Similar frameworks fragment across domains such as Community-in-the-Loop [164] and Organisation-in-the-Loop [389]). MaSH Loops builds directly on these foundations while extending its scope. Where SITL often treats “society” as an external stakeholder influencing the system, MaSH Loops model society, machine, and human as mutually entangled nodes in a single epistemic architecture. This reframing is crucial for generative AI, where outputs are not merely the end-point of computation but also new cultural artefacts that can recursively reshape societal norms and conceptual baselines. Humans in the loop (HITL) approaches provide oversight, feedback, and normative framing, actively shaping model behaviour through practices like RLHF, which encode human judgments into fine-tuning processes [81]. Machines in the loop (MITL) are not passive tools but “zombie” agents: lacking consciousness yet exerting influence through design choices, training data, and affordances.[11, 219]. Society in the loop (SITL) constitutes the broader ecosystem (regulations, infrastructures, value systems, and collective imaginaries) that condition both human use and machine development [170, 319]. Work in AI ethics and participatory governance shows, societal inputs are not just top-down constraints but active components in recursive control circuits [287, 319] This reconceptualisation brings MaSH Loops into conversation with Yuk Hui’s concept of recursivity, which he defines as the capacity of a system to act upon itself and undergo transformation [178]. While Hui’s recursivity shares conceptual ground with second- and third-order cybernetics (where feedback loops allow systems and observers to reflect and adapt) Hui extends the idea further. For Hui, recursivity is the idea that life and thought evolve by continually acting on themselves, shaped by both technologies and the cultural worldviews they grow within. These concepts align with the MaSH Loops framework, which similarly treats machines, humans, and societies not as discrete entities, but as co-creating a dynamic epistemic system. Like Hui’s recursivity, MaSH Loops frame governance not as external constraint, but as a situated process of ongoing world-making.
