title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 216
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

c epistemic system. Like Hui’s recursivity, MaSH Loops frame governance not as external constraint, but as a situated process of ongoing world-making.

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 206
The cybernetic MaSH loop draws from second and third order cybernetics, where the observer is part of the system, and even norms and power structures are questioned. It extends into enactivist epistemology, where meaning is enacted through feedback rather than passively received or imposed. This framing helps governance designers map how the triad’s parts interact and evaluate how AI-assisted decision-making both takes shape and impacts people and groups.
Figure 33: MaSH Loops. Generative AI as an inter-relational system of Machines, Societies, and Humans. When deployed at scale, AI models can influence how culture is produced, norms circulate, and meaning is made. Outputs might become cultural artefacts, such as text or images, which then feed back into public discourse (i.e. via social or legacy media), educational content, and institutional workflows. Prompts are not mere queries but micro-political gestures, activating latent trajectories shaped by training data and fine-tuning. Most current HITL and SITL frameworks treat feedback loops as instruments of oversight or alignment. MaSH Loops reconceptualise AI as a cognitive and cultural environment that also impacts us. In this environment, memetic substructures act as attractors, guiding both machine outputs and human interpretations. MaSH Loops can offer a practical tool for responsible AI. A 2021 review found fairness metrics inadequate, urging SITL and participatory design [367]. By crowdsourcing moral decisions or incorporating stakeholder deliberation, SITL models enact cybernetic principles of adaptive control. In domains from healthcare to
