title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 218
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

those loops. Understanding AI as a triad of Human, Machine, and Society helps us recognise that meaning doesn’t sit in silos but is negotiated through

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 208
relational processes. Yet to grasp how meaning arises at the level of individual interactions, we need a language capable of describing latent possibilities rather than explicit forms. It is here that metaphors from particle physics and quantum mechanics prove powerful, enabling us to visualise AI’s semantic landscape not as a collection of fixed responses, but as a field of structured potentials awaiting activation. 11
5.8 Potentials “Fields are not things that exist in space; they are the very fabric of space itself.” Carlo Rovelli [337] A complementary lens is the model’s own semantic geometry, what I call “semantic hyperspace”: a high-dimensional landscape whose contours reflect learned features, basins of attraction, and the probabilistic flows that prompting sets in motion. 12 Another metaphor for LLMs builds on cultural attractors and MaSH Loops: the Higgs field. Like the Higgs field, an invisible force detectable only through effects, your semantic hyperspace is not fixed meanings, but a probabilistic field shaped by cultural, linguistic, and statistical forces. Within this hyperspace, clusters of meaning create basins of attraction (attractors): stable zones shaped by repeated usage, cultural reinforcement, and patterns in training data. These basins of attraction make certain continuations more likely. Other areas, the ridges, are less stable and more open to change. In Yuk Hui’s [178] terms, these are sites of contingency, where small perturbations (a prompt, an unexpected input) redirect meaning-making pathways. Mechanistic interpretability work has begun to reveal this terrain. Anthropic researchers show that neural networks represent meaningful features as directions in activation space; the basins are simply how these directions manifest at scale in inference [5]. Their Scaling Monosemanticity project extracted millions of such features from Claude 3 Sonnet, each semantically coherent: ranging from concepts like “Golden Gate Bridge” to “code vulnerabilities” to socially inflected traits such as “sarcastic praise” [163]. These features behave like attractor basins in semantic hyperspace: structured, directional, and intuitively interpretable. Crucially, they also show unevenness: many features are “dead” or 11 The analogy to quantum measurement is structural, not ontological. I am not claiming that LLMs instantiate quantum processes. The analogy is used to clarify how prompting, measurement conditions, and observer participation shape which outputs become actual. 12 The phrase semantic hyperspace has appeared sporadically in fields such as social semiotics and early NLP research [265, 290, 329] where it denotes abstract spaces of meaning across modalities or conceptual dimensions. In contrast, my work is novel in applying the term to the probabilistic and interpretive dynamics of generative AI, treating LLMs’ latent spaces as feature-rich semantic terrain shaped through prompting.
