title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 219
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

the probabilistic and interpretive dynamics of generative AI, treating LLMs’ latent spaces as feature-rich semantic terrain shaped through prompting.

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 209
rarely activated, suggesting that the hyperspace contains both dense and sparse regions, with basins clustered in some zones and vast ridges in others [163] Earlier work in computational linguistics had already gestured toward this probabilistic topography using the formalism of quantum mechanics. Platanov et al. [310] proposed modelling language within Hilbert spaces13, where words and documents exist in a superposition of possible meanings that only “resolve” into a specific interpretation when queried. In their account, querying is not passive retrieval but an act of measurement that reshapes the semantic field, much as a quantum observation perturbs the system it seeks to describe. This framing supports the semantic hyperspace metaphor developed here: meaning does not pre-exist as a stored item but arises through probabilistic resolution enacted by interaction. Beyond abstract modelling, the union of quantum-formalism with neural methods is now a valid field in information retrieval research. Zhang et al. [431] provide a systematic account on quantum-inspired neural language modelling. Their framework bridges symbolic and sub-symbolic methods: modelling meaning as dynamic superpositions that merge into coherent representations only via query-triggered measurement. Notably, quantum-inspired models have shown they can actually work in practice, outperforming classical approaches in tasks like query expansion, sentiment analysis, and even building lighter, more efficient architectures [425, 430]. This matters because it shows that treating meaning as a field that settles in context is not just a metaphor, but a workable computational approach. In this light, prompting becomes semantic navigation. Each input nudges the system toward a basin, echoing both statistical likelihood and cultural inheritance. I imagine this as steering a boat across the surface of a semantic sea, where my fingers trailing through the water send ripples that subtly reshape what emerges. Figure 34 offers a visual metaphor for this idea. It is not a scientific diagram, but an intuitive rendering of semantic hyperspace as a probabilistic landscape shaped by training, where some pathways are more stable than others and some remain more open to redirection.
13 A Hilbert space is a mathematical way of describing a space of possibilities. Just as a map locates a city using coordinates, a Hilbert space represents a system such as a particle’s state or a high-dimensional data representation as a point in a structured space. Each dimension captures a feature of the system, so complex states can be located precisely within this space. Different questions or measurements correspond to different projections of that point, each highlighting particular aspects while suppressing others. The same underlying state can therefore yield different outcomes depending on how it is probed. In this sense, what is observed is not simply retrieved from a fixed store but depends on the conditions under which the system is measured.
