title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 220
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

s probed. In this sense, what is observed is not simply retrieved from a fixed store but depends on the conditions under which the system is measured.

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 210
Figure 34: A semantic hyperspace. A visual metaphor for semantic hyperspace; an impression of how this probabilistic space feels rather than a scientific diagram. While the analogy is imperfect (the Higgs field is uniform, your semantic landscape is textured by asymmetries) it still captures a core truth: what emerges is not found but formed. Meaning doesn’t pre-exist in you. It resolves into being through interaction. In Peircean terms, meaning is not contained in the sign alone but arises through a triadic relation between sign, object, and interpretant, which makes it an effect of semiosis rather than a fixed property awaiting retrieval. Critically, any attempt to “measure” this landscape is itself participatory. As Härle et al. [163] note, even guiding sparse autoencoders with labelled concepts reshapes the space, underscoring the observer effect in semantic navigation. Probing the semantic hyperspace via a query perturbs the very probability topography one aims to chart. Our intervention lends directional energy into the system. The field we read is the field we have already nudged. Figure 35 extends this point through an analogy with Bell’s theorem. Its purpose is not to claim that language models are quantum systems in any literal sense, but to illustrate the argument that outputs are not fixed meanings waiting inside the model. They are enacted through the interaction between prompt and probabilistic structure.
