title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 221
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ent that outputs are not fixed meanings waiting inside the model. They are enacted through the interaction between prompt and probabilistic structure.

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 211
Figure 35: No hidden answers in generative AI. The diagram adapts Bell’s theorem as an analogy for LLM prompting: outputs are not fixed answers waiting inside the model, but enacted selections from a field of semantic possibilities shaped by the prompt. Meaning isn’t pulled from a filing cabinet. It emerges in real time taking on a form triggered by a prompt, shaped by billions of parameters: statistical shadows of language, culture, and patterns. These probabilities flow through the attention mechanism, shifting weight across tokens and contexts. Transformer layers refine these weightings, allowing the model to do more than parrot the next word. In plain terms: the model keeps glancing around, deciding which words deserve attention. The result is high-dimensional patterns, sometimes coherent, sometimes dissonant, depending on how the prompt activates the network. The model doesn’t ‘choose’ but surfaces the most likely continuation, shaped by semantic space and prompt structure. Like a current only visible when it flows through water, meaning in an LLM emerges not from stored content but from interaction. Here, meaning is not retrieved but enacted, dependent on entangled relations rather than isolated entities. Thus, the Higgs-style metaphor (a field detectable only by effects) and the semantic-hyperspace framing (a geometry of basins, features, and flows) are two views of the same phenomenon: structured potentials that only resolve as text when perturbed by a prompt. As Karen Barad puts it, reality itself is contingent on entanglement: it arises through intra-action, not observation alone [24]. A prompt likewise participates in world-making, shaping both the immediate output and the evolving landscape of possibilities. Every prompt directs the model toward certain basins of meaning while diverting it from others. It activates particular cultural trajectories, argumentative styles, emotional repertoires, and explanatory norms. When you ask for simplicity, you invoke pedagogical traditions embedded in the training data. When you ask for critique, you summon culturally specific
