title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 222
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

hen you ask for simplicity, you invoke pedagogical traditions embedded in the training data. When you ask for critique, you summon culturally specific

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 212
patterns of reasoning. When you ask for empathy, you activate linguistic performances of emotion. Prompting is therefore not a neutral act of retrieval. It is a micro-political intervention: the prompter enters the semantic field from a particular worldview, and the prompt helps determine which potentials become legible as output.
Figure 36: Prompting as a micro-political act. This image represents prompting as a situated intervention within a field of semantic potentials. The prompter does not approach the model from nowhere, but from a worldview that shapes what is asked, what is noticed, and what becomes measurable. Prompt choices interact with the model’s underlying probability space, making prompting a normative and evaluative act rather than a neutral technical input. For social scientists and humanities researchers, this framing turns prompting into an object of study in its own right. Prompts become small cultural artefacts through which people try to steer a probabilistic system, carrying traces of their values, assumptions, and social worlds. Examining how different communities prompt, and what those prompts elicit, offers a powerful method for understanding how meaning, authority, and culture circulate through these systems.
5.9 Harmonics “There is geometry in the humming of the strings, there is music in the spacing of the spheres.” (Attributed to Pythagoras, 5th century BCE) Potentials sketch the invisible field of semantic possibility; Harmonics let us hear what becomes audible when human and machine meet within it. In music, harmonics are the overtones that shimmer when a note is played; vibrations dividing into smaller, regular patterns, echoes of the fundamental tone. In generative AI, harmonics are analogous patterns shaped by machine architecture, human belief, and
