title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 223
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

regular patterns, echoes of the fundamental tone. In generative AI, harmonics are analogous patterns shaped by machine architecture, human belief, and

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 213
cultural superstructures. Just as musical harmonics arise from interacting waveforms, in LLMs they emerge from the interplay of prompt (human), architecture (machine), and cultural signal (society). Each output is not retrieval but resonance: an event born in relation. The fundamental tone is our own consciousness entangled with the system; the overtones are its uncanny reflections, sometimes giving the impression of a mind within the machine. This illusion parallels panpsychist and IIT-inspired claims that complex informational structures might host proto-conscious states, though here I argue the resonance is cultural and relational rather than intrinsic. I grasped the weight of participatory co-creation in LLMs while relaxing on a sunlit bench in the dog park, reading about the 2022 Nobel Prize in Physics, awarded to Alain Aspect, John Clauser, and Anton Zeilinger for work on quantum entanglement [386]. What struck me wasn’t only that particles remain mysteriously linked across space, but that this entanglement revealed something deeper: observation is not passive, it is co-created. At the quantum level, measurement does not uncover pre-existing reality; it helps create it. This insight is key to understanding LLMs, so some background quantum mechanics is needed. Hold onto your digital hat; things are about to get spooky!
5.9.1 No-hidden variables A hidden variable is a proposed property or mechanism that would fix the outcome of a quantum event prior to measurement. In such accounts, entangled particles are assumed to carry pre-existing instructions that determine their responses when measured. On this view, apparent randomness reflects incomplete knowledge rather than genuine indeterminacy, and the underlying system remains fully deterministic. Bell’s theorem challenged this picture by showing that no theory based on local hidden variables can reproduce the statistical correlations observed in entangled systems [87]. Experimental tests have consistently supported this result: outcomes cannot be explained by pre-assigned local values alone, but depend on correlations that emerge only in the act of measurement. Figure 37 uses this result as an analogy. It contrasts a “hidden variable” model of language, in which a prompt retrieves a fixed value already contained within the model, with a “no hidden variables” view, in which outputs are drawn from a field of possibilities shaped by probabilistic structure. The diagram is not a literal claim about quantum behaviour in language models, but a way of illustrating the argument that outputs are not stored answers waiting to be accessed. They are selections enacted through interaction between prompt and model.
