title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 224
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ing the argument that outputs are not stored answers waiting to be accessed. They are selections enacted through interaction between prompt and model.

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 214
Figure 37: No Hidden Answers in LLMs modelled on Bell’s theorem, outputs emerge from interacting probabilities, not fixed determinations. Work by Aspect, Clauser, and Zeilinger provided decisive experimental confirmation of Bell’s result, ruling out local hidden variable explanations for quantum correlations 14. The implication is not that reality becomes arbitrary, but that outcomes are inseparable from the conditions under which they are measured. Fuch’s argues, the act of observation does not merely describe reality, it enacts it [135]. Observation does not simply reveal a pre-existing state; it participates in bringing about a particular result. This point is carried forward here: when we probe a generative model, the output is not retrieved from a fixed store but arises through a structured interaction between prompt, model, and probabilistic constraint. This also clarifies why generative AI evaluation cannot rest on single prompt, single output tests. If prompts are part of the measurement apparatus, then variation is not mere noise but evidence of a participatory system. The proper unit of analysis is therefore not the model in isolation but the interactional event through which a response is enacted. Experiments supporting Bell’s Theorem proved only that no local hidden variables exist. The theorem forces a choice: keep realism but drop locality; preserve locality but abandon separability; or give up both.
14 The Nobel Prize in Physics 2022 was awarded jointly to Alain Aspect, John F. Clauser, and Anton Zeilinger “for experiments with entangled photons, establishing the violation of Bell inequalities and pioneering quantum information science.
