title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 229
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

, answer anchors, interfaces, and scoring rules are part of the measurement conditions through which some tendencies become legible and others recede.

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 219
5.9.3 No-hidden variables in LLMs Seen through the no-hidden variables lens, prompting a large language model is less like retrieving a fact from storage and more like conducting a measurement on an indeterminate system. This is also why benchmark design matters. If outputs are enacted under conditions rather than extracted from a fixed interior, then evaluation design is never neutral to what it measures. Chapter 4’s concern with prompt sets, anchor balancing, and scoring logic follows directly from that point. The model’s latent semantic space holds a structured set of possibilities, a probabilistic field shaped by training data, cultural priors, and architectural constraints, but the specific output only “resolves” into being through the interaction itself. The human choice of prompt shapes the outcome, just as a physicist’s choice of measurement shapes a quantum event. In both cases, what emerges is not a passive reflection of reality but an enacted result of entangled factors. Read this way, sycophancy and steering are not quirks but measurement choices. A similar intuition appears in quantum-inspired information retrieval models [310], where prompts are treated as measurement operators that narrow a distribution of latent meanings into a single response. Such approaches underscore that variability in outputs (whether sycophancy, bias, or drift) is not noise atop fixed content, but evidence of a participatory measurement process. These analogies are not meant to claim that AI is literally quantum, but to show how both fields confront the same challenge: how interaction itself brings reality into being. While quantum metaphors can overreach, participatory realism offers a productive lens: reminding us that observation enacts rather than reveals. Similarly, prompting is not just a request for information, but an ontological gesture: it shapes what gets said by the machine and how we might perceive internal machine “thinking”. Interestingly, even though large language models are deterministic in theory (their parameters fixed after training) in practice, they exhibit significant non-determinism. Empirical studies show that identical prompts can yield different outputs even under controlled conditions (even with temperature or “randomness” set to zero). Atil et al. [20] demonstrated that performance can fluctuate dramatically across repeated runs with up to 15% accuracy variance; for instance one run might get 70% more answers correct than another. Ouyang et al. [297] found similar instability in code generation: outputs shifted enough to turn success into failure.. This suggests that prompting an LLM is genuinely a kind of probabilistic encounter, shaped not only by the prompt but by the model’s internal stochasticity, its environment, and system-level variables beyond user control. That LLMs are non-deterministic in practice has important implications for how we evaluate and compare models; especially when rankings, regulations, or trust hinge on these performance measurements. If the same model can yield materially different outputs
