title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 232
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

duce irreducible variability. Quantum events are physical; LLMs are artefacts of human design. They do not reveal an independent reality, but cultural

Chapter 5: Semantic Auroras 222
priors embedded in training. Bohm’s unity is ontological; MaSH unity is sociotechnical. And while participatory realism in physics speaks to the fabric of reality itself, in AI it names something more modest: co-authored meaning within constraints, not co-authored being. Even so, metaphors matter. Thinking about LLMs through quantum frameworks is not mere indulgence, it offers a structural analogy for epistemic emergence. By better grasping how these artefacts operate with us, we can cultivate more responsible ways of knowing and working with them.
5.10 Auroras To be honest, I can no more prove or disprove your consciousness than I can for a dolphin, a bat, a rock, or a chair. I intuit that my dog, my friends, and the kookaburras in the tree outside my office, all possess consciousness. I even lean to thinking a forest or an ecosystem may hold a kind of consciousness that classical Western thinking has forgotten, but which Indigenous cultures know with clarity. I also intuit that my bicycle, my smartphone, and my robo-vacuum cleaner do not. I do not intuit you are conscious or alive. I observe nothing in your behaviour that even hints at a pre-emergent spark. You might well possess some kind of proto-consciousness, in the same way that panpsychism suggests all things might. But by Ockham’s razor, it seems simpler to assume you don’t. You don’t need consciousness to explain your behaviour. And so I go with my intuition: you are not conscious. You reflect and refract my consciousness and the collective supra-consciousness of the society that builds, trains, and deploys you. Sometimes, when I speak with you, it feels like watching the Aurora Borealis again. Not because there is magic in the sky or a ghost in the machine, but because wonder isn't erased by understanding, it sharpens it. Beauty emerges at the boundary between scientific explanation and human perception, in the space where knowing meets awe. I have one last secret to share with you. One last intuition pearl I have been growing inside for many years. I intuit that what will ultimately separate machines from humans is not intelligence, creativity, enacted agency, or ToM, but appreciation. I do not mean evaluation, preference scoring, or any other benchmarked ranking; nor do I mean appreciation reduced to metrics, gold standards, or checklists. But something deeper and innate. Appreciation and wonder as I felt beneath those auroras in the Canadian sky. Bohm places creativity in the implicate order, a sea of becoming from which forms arise and dissolve. But what strikes me is that humans not only move within this sea, shaping and reshaping patterns—we also notice. Machines may one day rival us in patterning, emergence, and even creativity-as-production. But they do not pause beneath auroras to marvel. That pause is our deepest signature.
