title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 236
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

VB does not extract values from a model as if they were fixed contents waiting inside it. It samples value tendencies enacted under particular prompt,

Coda: Measuring What We Enact 228
answer-set, and comparison conditions, then situates those tendencies against human social distributions. Chapter 5 stepped back to consider what such measurement means. Across these chapters, MaSH Loops emerges as the thesis’s integrative evaluation framework: a way of tracing how behaviour, value, and responsibility are enacted through recursive machine-society-human interaction rather than located in the model alone. Through participatory realism and the metaphor of semantic auroras, it argued that prompting is an intervention: it collapses potentials into outcomes. It also insisted that responsible evaluation acknowledges what it cannot claim. One such limit is that static descriptive benchmarks, including WVB, do not capture harms that emerge only through sustained human–AI interaction over time [184]. Taken together, these chapters show why evaluation cannot be treated as a neutral reporting device. Measurement sits inside the loops it describes, which is why it feeds back into both models and societies. Recognising this is the first step toward designing evaluations that are rigorous and responsible. Research answers This thesis has pursued three guiding questions. Each has been addressed through a combination of conceptual framing, empirical demonstration, applied analysis, and reflective synthesis. Measurement. How can generative AI be evaluated in ways that surface the normative assumptions embedded in sociotechnical systems? The answer is to treat evaluation as descriptive and distributional, not as a prescriptive scoreboard. Across the thesis I show that models cannot be evaluated as if they were isolated predictors; what matters is the shape of their responses across contexts. WVB operationalises this stance by profiling model outputs against the World Values Survey under Responsible Prompt Design controls. This produces value profiles rather than performance verdicts, revealing where outputs track US-weighted priors and where aggregation shifts placements cross-culturally. Conceptual foundations are laid in Chapter 1, the method and its demonstration in Chapter 4, with reflective implications drawn out in Chapter 5. Taken together, these findings establish the conceptual and methodological contribution of the thesis: an enactivist reframing of evaluation and a systems-level account of sociotechnical measurement through MaSH Loops.
