title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 237
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ogical contribution of the thesis: an enactivist reframing of evaluation and a systems-level account of sociotechnical measurement through MaSH Loops.

Coda: Measuring What We Enact. 229
Responsibility. What does it mean to evaluate AI responsibly in a world of value pluralism, so that evaluation reveals rather than prescribes? Here, responsibility means revealing rather than prescribing, designing instruments that show whose values are being enacted, and that invite contestation rather than enforcing a single norm. The MaSH Loops frame makes recursive interaction, not isolated outputs, the unit of analysis. This insight is developed conceptually in Chapter 1, applied in Chapter 3 (where sociotechnical mapping shows how market metrics function as governance), operationalised in Chapter 4 through WVB, and anchored philosophically in Chapter 5. These results show that proxies and benchmarks do not merely reflect practices and markets; they also shape them, and evaluation itself becomes a form of governance. Co-construction. In what ways do generative systems co-construct values with humans and institutions, and how can evaluation make this co-construction empirically legible? Generative models, users, and institutions co-enact outputs and norms through MaSH Loops. Evaluation makes this process legible when it profiles distributions across contested value items instead of collapsing them into a single “alignment” score. This idea is first introduced in Chapter 1, illustrated in Chapter 2 through the archival study of value drift in early GPT-3 (“the American accent”), and developed further in Chapter 3 with sociotechnical mapping of real estate metrics. It is then implemented in Chapter 4 via WVB, and reflected on in Chapter 5 through participatory realism. Together, these analyses preserve a vanished system state, show the stakes in applied domains, and mark some limits of measurement, including phenomena such as appreciation that resist valid operationalisation. Contributions Together, the chapters support a consistent claim: measurement choices help determine what models appear to be. At the conceptual level, the thesis develops a worked enactivist account of evaluation in generative AI. By introducing MaSH Loops, it frames models not as isolated predictors but as nodes in recursive sociotechnical systems. The addition of participatory realism clarifies why instruments are not passive observers but active participants: every measure helps to co-produce the reality it purports to reveal. This conceptual contribution also extends to the philosophy of AI by applying quantum participatory realism to LLM evaluation, treating questioning as intervention rather than passive observation.
