title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 238
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

he philosophy of AI by applying quantum participatory realism to LLM evaluation, treating questioning as intervention rather than passive observation.

Coda: Measuring What We Enact 230
At the methodological level, the thesis contributes a practical toolkit. The WVB combined with RPD controls demonstrates how to evaluate language models in ways that are pluralist, contestable, and empirically legible. This framework does not collapse responses into a single alignment score but produces profiles that can be interrogated across items, cohorts, and contexts—an alternative to leaderboard metrics that too often conceal normative assumptions. At the empirical and applied level, the thesis preserves a historical record of value drift in early GPT-3, a model state that has since disappeared, and shows how sociotechnical mapping can make feedback loops and power relations easier to see in applied domains such as real estate. These contributions translate abstract philosophical claims into evidence and practice, grounding theory in both archival and contemporary stakes. Taken together, these chapters extend the philosophy of AI beyond the familiar computationalist/constructivist divide and offer methods for keeping evaluative assumptions in view. The broader question becomes not only how good the model is, but what worlds our instruments make visible, and for whom. Like any research programme, this work was developed under constraints that shape what can be claimed and how it should be read. Limitations This work was conducted while the ground kept moving: rapid model change, uneven access, opaque training data and policies, and preprints outpacing peer review. Those conditions increase the risk of brittle constructs and silent model updates. I confronted this by archiving historical snapshots, using descriptive methods with explicit controls, and keeping assumptions visible through MaSH mapping. The pace of change is therefore the central limitation of this work. The findings should be understood as bounded by their moment, but framed so they can be revisited and audited as the field develops. A further limitation lies in the challenge of interdisciplinary work. Responsible AI cannot be advanced within the silo of any single field. Computer scientists, philosophers, social scientists, lawyers, and policy practitioners each hold partial but essential perspectives. The difficulty is that these communities often operate with different languages, methods, and incentives, which can create friction or mutual misunderstanding. Breaking down these barriers requires patience and respect: recognising the expertise of others, resisting the urge to collapse problems into one’s own disciplinary frame, and building shared concepts that allow collaboration across divides. Seen in this way, interdisciplinarity is itself a pluralist practice: it honours multiple ways of knowing, resists the dominance of any single disciplinary lens, and reflects the same
