title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 239
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

rity is itself a pluralist practice: it honours multiple ways of knowing, resists the dominance of any single disciplinary lens, and reflects the same

Coda: Measuring What We Enact. 231
commitments to plurality that underpin this thesis’s account of Responsible AI. While this thesis has aimed to contribute to that interdisciplinary work, the broader project of genuinely interdisciplinary Responsible AI remains unfinished and demanding, requiring humility from all sides and respect across disciplinary boundaries. Recommendations for Future Research This thesis has opened more questions than it has closed. Here I outline three central problems that may define the next stages of my research: the challenge of AI agents, the problem of responsible AI mapping, and the governance problem. Each is pressing today and will become only more urgent as AI systems become more powerful and embedded in society. For each, I sketch how my work contributes, how it builds on the wider literature, and how it can be applied in practice.
The challenge of AI Agents The problem. GenAI is moving rapidly from models to agents: systems scaffolded with memory, planning, and tool use that act autonomously across contexts. This shift creates exponentially harder evaluation challenges. Traditional benchmarks capture one-off outputs, but agents act in environments, persist across time, and interact with humans, tools, and other agents. How can we assure responsibility, transparency, and accountability in this setting? Why it matters. Recent industry and policy discourse from McKinsey [426], IBM [29], and the World Economic Forum [433] treats AI agents as central to the next wave of AI deployment. That growing deployment focus sharpens governance questions. Scholars [i.e. 67, 160, 205, 209] point to the dangers of instrumental convergence and misalignment: even well-specified goals can be pursued by means that violate human values. The risk is compounded by speed (agents can act faster than human oversight can respond) and by scale, as multiple agents interact with each other in open systems. These challenges make responsible evaluation of AI agents urgent. My contribution. Drawing on participatory realism [134], I frame evaluation itself as a measurement process: prompts, rubrics, and scaffolds act as operators that help constitute the agents being evaluated. Barad’s [24] agential realism highlights how these design choices enact agential cuts, shaping which kinds of agents appear and what responsibilities they can bear. Kasirzadeh & Gabriel’s [201] agentic profiles (autonomy, efficacy, goal complexity, and generality) supply a tractable set of dimensions along which agents can be evaluated. Platonov et al.’s [310] work on quantum-like models of cognition and information retrieval reinforces this methodological direction: by showing how
