title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 240
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

d. Platonov et al.’s [310] work on quantum-like models of cognition and information retrieval reinforces this methodological direction: by showing how

Coda: Measuring What We Enact 232
contextuality and order effects can be formalised with operator methods and yield measurable improvements, they demonstrate that philosophical claims about measurement as creation hold practical promise. My distinct contribution is to synthesise these strands into an evaluative stance that treats measurement not as passive observation but as a constitutive act: one that can be operationalised to make the co-construction of AI agents empirically visible and contestable. Application. My proposed framework translates these insights into MaSH Loops, treating evaluation as recursive cybernetics: mapping how agents co-evolve with their environments, and how measurement and governance are part of the same loop. Figure 38 maps out the cybernetics of participatory realism, showing how observation and feedback operate across four recursive orders. Rather than treating cybernetic order as a rigid taxonomy, it distinguishes escalating levels of reflexivity: behaviour correction, reflection on the observer and framing, intersubjective negotiation, and reflexive attention to the evaluative system itself. The layered orders of cybernetics illustrate how observation operates at different depths: from behaviour (1st order), to thought (2nd order), to intersubjective negotiation (3rd order), and finally to reflexivity about the system itself (4th order). More concretely, this future work treats agentic systems as scaffolded configurations rather than isolated models. Prompts, tools, memory, and orchestration layers are not peripheral implementation details but part of the governance surface, because they shape which actions become possible, which behaviours stabilise across time, and where accountability should sit. Evaluation must therefore track behavioural trajectories across MaSH Loops, not merely score single outputs at a single step. Next steps. 1. Secure access to developer-level agent systems with memory, planning, and tool use. 2. Build an evaluation protocol using operator sweeps and agentic dimensions as invariants. 3. Publish diffractive profiles showing how design choices co-constitute different kinds of agents.
