title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 242
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

. But guidelines alone rarely change practice: engineers and data scientists often lack methods to see how metrics themselves embed normative choices.

Coda: Measuring What We Enact 234
Consider a practical example. An engineer fine-tuning a hiring model might use accuracy on résumé classification as the key benchmark. Without sociotechnical mapping, they may not notice that the benchmark rewards superficial features (e.g. degree titles from elite universities) that act as proxies for socioeconomic status, thereby disadvantaging equally qualified candidates from non-traditional backgrounds. With a mapping tool, the engineer could trace how the benchmark’s scoring embeds these assumptions, re-design the evaluation to emphasise skills over proxies, and document the trade-offs clearly. Or take a bank deploying an AI agent to assess loan applications. If the benchmark emphasises repayment rates, mapping might show that this proxy reproduces existing socioeconomic disparities by down-prioritising applicants from certain neighbourhoods or backgrounds. Here, sociotechnical mapping can help financial institutions detect how a “neutral” metric actually encodes structural bias and adjust their evaluation framework to promote fairness and regulatory compliance. Beyond engineers, managers and CEOs also need these tools. They are accountable for ensuring that deployment of AI in their companies is responsible, safe, and protective of both the firm and its customers. A CEO who can show regulators, shareholders, and the public that their company uses transparent sociotechnical mapping to audit benchmarks and surface blind spots demonstrates leadership and reduces reputational risk. A product manager overseeing a customer-facing agent can use these mappings to reassure clients that the evaluation process itself has been stress-tested for fairness and reliability. Equipping both technical staff and decision-makers with methods to map normative assumptions thus builds an organisation-wide culture of responsible AI: engineers diagnose and fix, managers integrate into workflows, and executives use it to demonstrate accountability and trustworthiness. My contribution. I propose sociotechnical mapping as a method to make normative assumptions explicit, traceable, and contestable. This builds on traditions in sociotechnical systems, quantification studies, and the sociology of measurement. My technical instantiation uses the methodologies developed when I created WVB paired with RPD controls to reveal how metric choices (anchors, paraphrases, normalization) shift model profiles. Rather than producing single scores, this method surfaces a value profile of a model and its contextual deployment: which values are amplified, which are flattened, and how context-sensitive they are. Application. This approach can be applied to benchmarks such as MMLU, HELM, or multi-modal suites: each can be stress-tested for proxy biases, metric drift, and context sensitivity. For example, one could use prompt and anchor sweeps to see how small wording changes shift demographic tendencies. The methodology demands tools that preserve distributional reporting, uncertainty estimation, audit trails, while stress-testing
