title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 243
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

mographic tendencies. The methodology demands tools that preserve distributional reporting, uncertainty estimation, audit trails, while stress-testing

Coda: Measuring What We Enact. 235
the benchmarks against data contamination, user-interface (UI) artifacts, or policy-driven model changes. Outputs from these mappings would be made accessible to developers, auditors, and regulators through reproducible prompt sets, transparent templates, and interactive dashboards, so that non-experts can inspect how their metrics embed assumptions. Next steps. 1. Extend methods. Build on the WVB and sociotechnical mapping techniques developed in this thesis to cover multilingual, multimodal, and agentic systems, ensuring the approach scales with the frontier of AI development. 2. Stress-test in practice. Collaborate with external stakeholders and run sandboxed model experiments to test the robustness, usability, and transferability of these methods beyond the lab. 3. Democratise access. Develop toolkits, templates, and course material, so that engineers, auditors, and policymakers can apply these methods without specialist training in measurement theory or philosophy of science.
The governance problem The problem. Current approaches to AI governance lean heavily on bureaucratic, one-size-fits-all frameworks. They assume AI systems are static, bounded, and auditable at a single point in time. In reality, contemporary systems are dynamic and recursive: they adapt, update, and feed back into the very environments they act upon. Approaches that treat AI as fixed objects fail to capture this complexity and miss how evaluation itself shapes future system behaviour. Why it matters. As AI agents are embedded into infrastructures across diverse cultural and legal contexts, governance will be tested in plural and contested environments. This is not an abstract point: the impact of evaluation frameworks will be most acute for groups that are already marginalised or vulnerable. Indigenous peoples, whose worldviews and values are often absent from mainstream benchmarks, risk being misrepresented or erased by one-size-fits-all evaluations. Children and youth at risk face particular exposure, since AI agents are already being piloted in education, social services, and online safety contexts where errors can cause long-lasting harm. Immigrants may be disadvantaged when evaluation frameworks assume normative linguistic or cultural baselines that do not fit their lived realities. People with disabilities are frequently excluded by benchmarks that optimise for average-case performance, ignoring accessibility, accommodation, and fairness concerns. In each case, rigid frameworks fail precisely because they cannot capture the diversity of values, needs, and vulnerabilities at stake.
