title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 1
section: evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechnical-systems
chunk: 244
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ness concerns. In each case, rigid frameworks fail precisely because they cannot capture the diversity of values, needs, and vulnerabilities at stake.

Coda: Measuring What We Enact 236
My contribution. My framework of MaSH Loops and cybernetic mapping provides a way to evaluate AI as part of recursive sociotechnical systems. By foregrounding value pluralism, it shows how machines, societies, and humans co-constitute one another. This moves us beyond universalist risk taxonomies and toward context-sensitive governance that can flex across different cultural, political, and institutional settings. Application. I propose translating these methods into forms usable by regulators, standards bodies, and civil society. This includes reproducible prompt-sets, transparent reporting templates, and model-cards-for-evaluations. It also requires more granular human data: for example, a sub-national lens in the US to surface polarisation, or co-design with Indigenous communities in Australia to bring forward values otherwise invisible to mainstream frameworks. Next steps. 1. Translate MaSH-informed evaluation into governance templates, reporting standards, and model cards. 2. Pilot context-specific evaluations (e.g. US sub-national demographics, Indigenous-led measures, or evaluations aimed at protecting children and young people). 3. Partner with regulators, standards bodies, and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) to test pluralist evaluation in practice, demonstrating its value for both organisational accountability and public trust.
Future research summary Together, these three strands form a coherent research programme: developing methods to scale descriptive evaluation, building mappings that make assumptions visible, and translating these insights into governance frameworks that can hold pluralist societies together. Each is urgent today and will only become more critical as AI systems evolve into agents. What unites them is the conviction that evaluation is not neutral, but constitutive: it shapes the very systems and societies it measures. The next phase of my work will take this conviction from theory to practice. This thesis therefore opens two linked paths for later work: one developing participatory measurement and prompting more explicitly, and another extending MaSH Loops toward the evaluation and governance of scaffolded agentic systems whose behaviour unfolds across time and institutional context. Two immediate extensions follow from this thesis. First, evaluation must move from outputs to trajectories: treating behaviour as path-dependent movement shaped by prompts, memory, tools, and environment, and making phenomena such as semantic friction and ripple propagation empirically visible. Second, as systems become agentic,
