title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 11
section: readability
chunk: 430
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

se abbreviations that are well-accepted in the application domain.
Maintain a list of accepted abbreviations, and use only abbreviations on that list.

=== naming conventions ===
Choose names that are as self-documenting as possible.
Use a short synonym instead of an abbreviation.
Use names given by the application, but do not use obscure jargon.
Avoid using the same name to declare different kinds of identifiers.
Use singular, general nouns as subtype identifiers.
Choose identifiers that describe one of the subtype's values.
Consider using suffixes for subtype identifiers that define visible access types, visible subranges, or visible array types.
For private types, do not use identifier constructions (e.g., suffixes) that are unique to subtype identifiers.
Do not use the subtype names from predefined packages.
Use predicate clauses or adjectives for Boolean objects.
Use singular, specific nouns as object identifiers.
Choose identifiers that describe the object's value during execution.
Use singular, general nouns as identifiers for record components.
Use a consistent naming convention for tagged types and associated packages.
Use action verbs for procedures and entries.
Use predicate clauses for Boolean functions.
Use nouns for non-Boolean functions.
Give packages names that imply a higher level of organization than subprograms. Generally, these are noun phrases that describe the abstraction provided.
Give tasks names that imply an active entity.
Use nouns descriptive of the data being protected for protected units.
Consider naming generic subprograms as if they were nongeneric subprograms.
Consider naming generic packages as if they were nongeneric packages.
Make the generic names more general than the instantiated names.
Use symbolic values instead of literals, wherever possible.
Use the predefined constants Ada.Numerics.Pi and Ada.Numerics.e for the mathematical constants Pi and e.
Use constants instead of variables for constant values.
Use a constant when the value is specific to a type or when the value must be static.
Use named numbers instead of constants, whenever possible.
Use named numbers to replace numeric literals whose type or context is truly universal.
Use constants for objects whose values cannot change after elaboration. (United Technologies 1987).
Show relationships between symbolic values by defining them with static expressions.
Use linearly independent sets of literals.
Use attributes like 'First and 'Last instead of literals, wherever possible.
Use a name that indicates the kind of problem the exception represents.
Include a prefix like New, Make, or Create in naming constructors (in this sense, operations to create and/or initialize an object).
Use names indicative of their content for child packages containing constructors.
