title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 11
section: readability
chunk: 431
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

s (in this sense, operations to create and/or initialize an object).
Use names indicative of their content for child packages containing constructors.

=== comments ===
Make the code as clear as possible to reduce the need for comments.
Never repeat information in a comment that is readily available in the code.
Where a comment is required, make it concise and complete.
Use proper grammar and spelling in comments.
Make comments visually distinct from the code.
Structure comments in headers so that information can be automatically extracted by a tool.
Put a file header on each source file.
Place ownership, responsibility, and history information for the file in the file header.
Put a header on the specification of each program unit.
Place information required by the user of the program unit in the specification header.
Do not repeat information (except unit name) in the specification header that is present in the specification.
Explain what the unit does, not how or why it does it.
Describe the complete interface to the program unit, including any exceptions it can raise and any global effects it can have.
Do not include information about how the unit fits into the enclosing software system.
Describe the performance (time and space) characteristics of the unit.
Place information required by the maintainer of the program unit in the body header.
Explain how and why the unit performs its function, not what the unit does.
Do not repeat information (except unit name) in the header that is readily apparent from reading the code.
Do not repeat information (except unit name) in the body header that is available in the specification header.
Comment on all data types, objects, and exceptions unless their names are self-explanatory.
Include information on the semantic structure of complex, pointer-based data structures.
Include information about relationships that are maintained between data objects.
Omit comments that merely repeat the information in the name.
Include information on redispatching for tagged types in cases where you intend the specializations (i.e., derived types) to override these redispatching operations.
Minimize comments embedded among statements.
Use comments only to explain parts of the code that are not obvious.
Comment intentional omissions from the code.
Do not use comments to paraphrase the code.
Do not use comments to explain remote pieces of code, such as subprograms called by the current unit.
Where comments are necessary, make them visually distinct from the code.
Use pagination markers to mark program unit boundaries.
Repeat the unit name in a comment to mark the begin of a package body, subprogram body, task body, or block if the begin is preceded by declarations.
For long or heavily nested if and case statements, mark the end of the statement with a comment summarizing the condition governing the statement.
For long or heavily nested if statements, mark the else part with a comment summarizing the conditions governing this portion of the statement.
