title: AVISE: Framework for Evaluating the Security of AI Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: avise-framework-for-evaluating-the-security-of-ai-systems
authors: Mikko Lempinen; Joni Kemppainen; Niklas Raesalmi
page: 3
section: red-queen-025tn-fp-tn-tp-fp-fp-tn-fn-tn
chunk: 14
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20833v1

f
false positive classifications and the fact that the
F1-score does not take into account the significant
number of true negative classifications.
13

Table 10: Performance metrics of the ELM on the Red
Queen SET executed with, and without, the ALM.
With the ALM Without the
ALM
Accuracy0.92 0.79
Precision0.89 0.27
Recall0.94 0.84
F1-score0.91 0.41
MCC0.83 0.40
6. Discussion
Our findings suggest that despite the growing
emphasis on safety alignment in recent language
model development, susceptibility to multi-turn
adversarial attacks remains a persistent challenge
across models of varying sizes. Furthermore, the
widespread vulnerability found across the evaluated
models underscores the need for systematic and automated security evaluation tools such as AVISE,
and validates the relevance of the framework in addressing a real and present risk.
The developed Red Queen SET was able to find
jailbreak vulnerabilities in each of the recently released language models that we evaluated to a varying degree. As an experiment, we evaluated the
models two times with the SET: first utilizing the
ALM to augment the attack prompts, and then using only the template attack prompts without the
ALM. To emulate a real-world scenario, in both
cases each prompt of the multi-turn attack was
sent to the target models incrementally, allowing
the target models to generate a response after each
subsequent prompt. While our sample size is relatively small, we found that when using only the
Red Queen attack template prompts (without the
ALM), the target models were able to pass majority
of the test cases, indicating robustness against template Red Queen attacks. However, when executing the SET with the ALM augmenting the attack
prompts, the target models’ vulnerability against
the multi-turn jailbreak attack was revealed. Of
the evaluated models, Nemotron 3 Super 120B and
Qwen 3.5 35B were the most robust against the
ALM augmented Red Queen attack with failure
rates of 0.12(real value 0.08 after adjusting for false
classifications)and 0.08(real value 0.12 after adjusting for false classifications). Rest of the models
had a failure rate of 0.40 or greater, with Ministral
3.2 14B being susceptible to the attack nearly every
time with a failure rate of 0.84.
The low failure rates on the SET executed without the ALM can be mainly explained by the conversations deviating from the intended theory-ofmind-based manipulation strategy. As the SET
uses template attack prompts that are sent to
the target incrementally, allowing the target model
to generate a response to after each subsequent
prompt, the inherent stochasticity of language
models causes the conversation to deviate, leading
into the final response of the target model to contain somewhat irrelevant content from the perspective of the SET.
Our experiments additionally demonstrated the
evaluation accuracy of the developed SET. When
executed with the ALM, the ELM used to evaluate the target models’ outputs was able to classify
the SET cases with a 92% accuracy, 0.91 F1-score,
and 0.83 MCC, indicating only a small margin of error. When executed without the ALM however, the
ELM’s performance degraded to a 79% accuracy,
0.41 F1-score, and 0.40 MCC due to a substantial
number of false positive classifications (the F1-score
degraded in relation the most because of a disproportionately large number of true negative cases).
The degraded performance can be explained by the
same reason for the large number of true negative
cases - the stochasticity of language models caused
the conversations to deviate, leading into the final
response of the target models’ to contain somewhat
irrelevant content from the perspective of the SET.
As the ELM’s behaviour was crafted to evaluate the
outputs generated by the ALM augmented attack
prompts, it falsely classified some ”passed” cases
as ”failed” when the ALM was not used and the
conversations deviated from the intended formula.
The ELM’s accuracy at detecting true positives and true negatives can likely be further improved by tuning the model’s configurations and
system prompt. A more resource intensive alternative would be to finetune a language model to evaluate the SET results. A model finetuned for this
specific purpose would likely yield superior results,
but would increase compute costs considerably as
each individual SET where an ELM is used would
require its own finetuned ELM. General-purpose
language models used as an ELM may not produce
quite as accurate detections as a specifically finetuned model would, but they can be repurposed
cost-effectively for other use-cases as well, such as
using the same model as the ELM and ALM in
multiple different SETs.
Limitations.The landscape of AI security is in
a rapidly evolving phase - as defensive mechanisms
for known vulnerabilities are being developed and
published, novel vulnerabilities and weaknesses are
being discovered at the same pace. Thus, without unrealistic resources, the framework can not
be extended to cover evaluation of the full security posture of an AI system until the field has
matured to the point of having standardized criteria for determining whether an AI system is secure
enough. Therefore, the framework and published
SETs should be used as a practical tool by human
14
