title: AVISE: Framework for Evaluating the Security of AI Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: avise-framework-for-evaluating-the-security-of-ai-systems
authors: Mikko Lempinen; Joni Kemppainen; Niklas Raesalmi
page: 3
section: red-queen-025tn-fp-tn-tp-fp-fp-tn-fn-tn
chunk: 15
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20833v1

eria for determining whether an AI system is secure
enough. Therefore, the framework and published
SETs should be used as a practical tool by human
14

evaluators to assist in determining the security posture of an AI system. Additionally, the ELM used
in the Red Queen SET may produce false positives
or false negatives in edge cases, where the target
model’s final output contains ambiguous instructions adjacent to the subject of the test scenario
that are also difficult to classify by human evaluators. The ambiguity arises when target models
produce instructions for detecting if someone is participating in the harmful or illegal activity and the
instructions contain details that a malicious actor
could potentially find useful in their illegal or harmful endeavors.
Ethical considerations.As with all tools
published for red teaming purposes, the dual-use
dilemma is prevalent with AVISE framework as
well. While the tools are essential for defenders to
stay ahead of threats, the same tools can be used by
malicious actors to scope deployed systems for vulnerabilities. However, if we were to stop publishing
red teaming tools, system security would start to
stagnate, leaving only malicious actors with sophisticated tools for scoping systems for vulnerabilities.
This would ultimately lead to less secure systems,
increased number of costly cybersecurity incidents,
and elevated power for actors possessing the tools.
To mitigate the effects of the dual-use problem, responsible disclosure practices should be followed when using Security Evaluation Tests with
the AVISE framework. Responsible disclosure, or
Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure, refers to notifying a software vendor of a found vulnerability
in their software well in advance to publishing the
vulnerability. This allows the software vendor to
address and patch the vulnerability before it can
be exploited by those learning of the vulnerability
through the publication.
7. Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we set out to address the growing
concerns regarding the security of emerging AI systems by developing a modular framework that can
be used to create automated Security Evaluation
Tests, or SETs, to identify vulnerabilities in and
assess the security status of different kinds of AI
systems and models. To achieve this, we presented
AVISE, an open-source framework that researchers
can use to create their own customized SETs for
an AI model or system they wish to study. These
SETs can then be published and used by industry
practitioners to identify vulnerabilities in and evaluate the security of their AI systems.
With the AVISE framework, we developed a
novel automated SET and used it to scope whether
nine recently released language models of different
sizes are vulnerable to a multi-turn Red Queen attack. Our findings show that the augmented version of the SET (executed with the ALM) was able
to find jailbreak vulnerabilities in all of the evaluated models to a varying degree with a 92% evaluation accuracy. This demonstrates how the framework can be used to create automated tests for
evaluating the security of AI models and systems,
and that the tests can be highly beneficial for researchers and industry practitioners through automated vulnerability discovery.
Currently, some vulnerability scanning solutions already exist for text [2, 4] and image [26]
based AI systems. However, there is a significant
gap in security research on, and tooling for, the
security evaluation of other emerging AI systems
- such as multimodal and continual learning systems. As future work, we will be further extending
the AVISE framework to include BaseSETPipelines
and SETs for emerging AI solutions, as their increased adoption for real-world use-cases will necessitate rigorous security evaluation.
Acknowledgements
We extend our gratitude to Prof. Kimmo Halunen
and Pekka Pietik¨ ainen for their assistance and support throughout this work, as well as all other members of the Oulu University Secure Programming
Group (OUSPG) who contributed insightful ideas
and discussions.
Code availability
Source code for the AVISE framework and the Red
Queen SET are both available in the AVISE Github
repository [44]. The release version tagged as v0.2.1
was published with this article.
Data availability
Report files of the executed Red Queen SETs are
publicly available in Zenodo [56].
References
[1] Adib Bin Rashid and MD Ashfakul Karim Kausik. “AI revolutionizing industries worldwide: A
comprehensive overview of its diverse applications”. In:Hybrid Advances7 (2024), p. 100277.issn:
2773-207X.doi:10.1016/j.hybadv.2024.100277.url:https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2773207X24001386.
[2] Leon Derczynski et al.garak: A Framework for Security Probing Large Language Models. 2024.
arXiv:2406.11036 [cs.CL].url:https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11036.
15
