title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 7
section: portability
chunk: 224
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

th a package, in this case, the package Text_IO. Guidelines 6.1.1 and 6.2.4 discuss the related issues of unprotected shared variables.

== Summary ==

=== fundamentals ===
In programs or components intended to have a long life, avoid using the features of Ada declared as "obsolescent" by Annex J of the Ada Reference Manual (1995), unless the use of the feature is needed for backward compatibility with Ada 83 (Ada Reference Manual 1983).
Document the use of any obsolescent features.
Avoid using the following features:
The short renamings of the packages in the predefined environment (e.g., Text_IO as opposed to Ada.Text_IO)
The character replacements of ! for |, : for #, and % for quotation marks
Reduced accuracy subtypes of floating-point types
The 'Constrained attribute as applied to private types
The predefined package ASCII
The exception Numeric_Error
Various representation specifications, including at clauses, mod clauses, interrupt entries, and the Storage_Size attribute
Make informed assumptions about the support provided for the following on potential target platforms:
Number of bits available for type Integer (range constraints)
Number of decimal digits of precision available for floating-point types
Number of bits available for fixed-point types (delta and range constraints)
Number of characters per line of source text
Number of bits for Root_Integer expressions
Number of seconds for the range of Duration
Number of milliseconds for Duration'Small
Minimum and maximum scale for decimal types
Avoid assumptions about the values and the number of values included in the type Character.
Use highlighting comments for each package, subprogram, and task where any nonportable features are present.
For each nonportable feature employed, describe the expectations for that feature.
Consider using only a parameterless procedure as the main subprogram.
Consider using Ada.Command_Line for accessing values from the environment, but recognize that this package's behavior and even its specification are nonportable.
Encapsulate and document all uses of package Ada.Command_Line.
Create packages specifically designed to isolate hardware and implementation dependencies and designed so that their specification will not change when porting.
Clearly indicate the objectives if machine or solution efficiency is the reason for hardware or implementation-dependent code.
For the packages that hide implementation dependencies, maintain different package bodies for different target environments.
Isolate interrupt receiving tasks into implementation-dependent packages.
Refer to Annex M of the Ada Reference Manual (1995) for a list of implementation-dependent features.
Avoid the use of vendor-supplied packages.
Avoid the use of features added to the predefined packages that are not specified in the Ada language definition or Specialized Needs Annexes.
Use features defined in the Specialized Needs Annexes rather than vendor-defined features.
Document clearly the use of any features from the Specialized Needs Annexes (systems programming, real-time systems, distributed systems, information systems, numerics, and safety and security).
Do not write code whose correct execution depends on the particular parameter passing mechanism used by an implementation (Ada Reference Manual 1995, §6.2 [Annotated]; Cohen 1986).
If a subprogram has more than one formal parameter of a given subtype, at least one of which is [in] out, make sure that the subprogram can properly handle the case when both formal parameters denote the same actual object.
Avoid depending on the order in which certain constructs in Ada are evaluated .
