title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 7
section: portability
chunk: 225
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

le the case when both formal parameters denote the same actual object.
Avoid depending on the order in which certain constructs in Ada are evaluated .

=== numeric types and expressions ===
Avoid using the predefined numeric types in package Standard . Use range and digits declarations and let the implementation pick the appropriate representation.
For programs that require greater accuracy than that provided by the global assumptions, define a package that declares a private type and operations as needed; see Pappas (1985) for a full explanation and examples.
Consider using predefined numeric types (Integer, Natural, Positive) for:
Indexes into arrays where the index type is not significant, such as type String
"Pure" numbers, that is, numbers with no associated physical unit (e.g., exponents)
Values whose purpose is to control a repeat or iteration count
Use an implementation that supports the Numerics Annex (Ada Reference Manual 1995, Annex G) when performance and accuracy are overriding concerns .
Carefully analyze what accuracy and precision you really need.
Do not press the accuracy limits of the machine(s).
Comment the analysis and derivation of the numerical aspects of a program.
Anticipate the range of values of subexpressions to avoid exceeding the underlying range of their base type. Use derived types, subtypes, factoring, and range constraints on numeric types.
Consider using <= and >= to do relational tests on real valued arguments, avoiding the <, >, =, and /= operations.
Use values of type attributes in comparisons and checking for small values.
In information systems, declare different numeric decimal types to correspond to different scales (Brosgol, Eachus, and Emery 1994).
Create objects of different decimal types to reflect different units of measure (Brosgol, Eachus, and Emery 1994).
Declare subtypes of the appropriately scaled decimal type to provide appropriate range constraints for application-specific types.
Encapsulate each measure category in a package (Brosgol, Eachus, and Emery 1994).
Declare as few decimal types as possible for unitless data (Brosgol, Eachus, and Emery 1994).
For decimal calculations, determine whether the result should be truncated toward 0 or rounded.
Avoid decimal types and arithmetic on compilers that do not support the Information Systems Annex (Ada Reference Manual 1995, Annex F) in full.
