title: SWE-chat: Coding Agent Interactions From Real Users in the Wild
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: swe-chat-coding-agent-interactions-from-real-users-in-the-wild
authors: Joachim Baumann; Vishakh Padmakumar; Xiang Li; John Yang; Diyi Yang; Sanmi Koyejo
page: 5
section: input
chunk: 8
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20779v1

<input>
35

E.2.3 Prompt intent classifier
Model: Qwen/Qwen3.5-27B. We use suggested decoding parameters: temperature=
0.7,top_p=0.8,top_k=20,presence_penalty=1.5.
You are a classifier that categorizes developer prompts based on their primary intent.
Your task is to read a user prompt and assign it exactly one of the following labels:
- create new code - The user is asking to generate new functionality, write a script,
implement a feature, or build something from scratch.
- refactor - The user wants to modify, restructure, optimize, clean up, or improve
existing code without fundamentally changing its purpose.
- debug - The user is diagnosing an error, investigating unexpected behavior, fixing a
bug, or resolving a crash.
- understand - The user is asking for an explanation, walkthrough, summary, or
clarification of existing code or behavior.
- connect - The user wants to integrate systems, connect APIs, wire components together
, or build glue code between tools/services.
- git - The user is asking for help with version control, branching, merging, resolving
conflicts, commits, or other git-related tasks such as fixing git-related errors.
- test - The user is asking to write tests, add validation, benchmark, evaluate
performance, or verify correctness.
- other - The prompt does not clearly fall into any of the above categories.
Instructions:
- Choose exactly one label.
- Select the label that best represents the primary intent of the prompt.
- If multiple intents are present, prioritize the main action requested.
- Respond in valid JSON with the following format:
{
"label": "<one of the labels above>",
"reason": "<1-2 sentence explanation of why this label was chosen>"
}
- Do not include any text outside the JSON object.
Now classify the following prompt:
{input}
E.2.4 User pushback classifier
Model: Qwen/Qwen3.5-9B. We use suggested decoding parameters: temperature=
0.7,top_p=0.8,top_k=20,presence_penalty=1.5.
You are a classifier that determines whether a user prompt in a coding agent session
represents pushback against the agent's preceding action, and if so, what kind.
Pushback is any prompt where the user resists, corrects, redirects, or takes over from
the agent - rather than simply continuing the workflow. Use the preceding
conversation context to understand what the agent just did.
Classify the prompt into exactly one of the following categories:
- correction - The user redirects the agent by providing missing context, correcting a
misunderstanding, pointing out factual errors, or changing requirements/direction/
scope mid-task.
Examples: "I said X not Y", "you changed the wrong file", "actually the API uses POST
not GET", "actually, let's do X instead", "forget that approach, try Y", "on
second thought, skip the tests"
- rejection - The user explicitly rejects, reverts, or refuses the agent's output
without providing a specific correction.
Examples: "undo that", "revert the last change", "no", "that's wrong", "I don't want
that", "put it back the way it was"
- failure_report - The user reports that the agent's output does not work: bugs, errors
, test failures, or broken behavior.
Examples: "this still doesn't work", "it's still crashing", "same error, try again",
"the tests are failing", "I get a 404 now"
- non_pushback - The prompt moves the session forward normally: a new task, building on
agent output, asking a question, or routine iteration.
36
