title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 3
section: concurrency
chunk: 63
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

ts multiple tasks to use Set_Exit_Status, then there can be no guarantee that any particular status value is the one actually returned.

== Summary ==

=== concurrency options ===
Consider using protected objects to provide mutually exclusive access to data.
Consider using protected objects to control or synchronize access to data shared by multiple tasks .
Consider using protected objects to implement synchronization, such as a passive resource monitor.
Consider encapsulating protected objects in the private part or body of a package.
Consider using a protected procedure to implement an interrupt handler.
Do not attach a protected procedure handler to a hardware interrupt if that interrupt has a maximum priority greater than the ceiling priority assigned to the handler.
Avoid the use of global variables in entry barriers.
Avoid the use of barrier expressions with side effects.
Use tasks to model selected asynchronous threads of control within the problem domain.
Consider using tasks to define concurrent algorithms.
Consider using rendezvous when your application requires synchronous unbuffered communication.
Consider using discriminants to minimize the need for an explicit initialization operation (Rationale 1995, §9.1).
Consider using discriminants to control composite components of the protected objects, including setting the size of an entry family (Rationale 1995, §9.1).
Consider using a discriminant to set the priority of a protected object (Rationale 1995, §9.1).
Consider using a discriminant to identify an interrupt to a protected object (Rationale 1995, §9.1).
Consider declaring a task type with a discriminant to indicate (Rationale 1995, §9.6):
Priority, storage size, and size of entry families of individual tasks of a type
Data associated with a task (through an access discriminant)
Consider using single task declarations to declare unique instances of concurrent tasks.
Consider using single protected declarations to declare unique instances of protected objects.
Minimize dynamic creation of tasks because of the potentially high startup overhead; reuse tasks by having them wait for new work on some appropriate entry queue.
Do not rely on pragma Priority unless your compiler supports the Real-Time Annex (Ada Reference Manual 1995, Annex D) and priority scheduling.
Minimize risk of priority inversion by use of protected objects and ceiling priority.
Do not rely upon task priorities to achieve a particular sequence of task execution.
Do not depend on a particular delay being achievable (Nissen and Wallis 1984).
Use a delay until not a delay statement to delay until a specific time has been reached.
Avoid using a busy waiting loop instead of a delay.
Carefully consider the placement of components of protected types within a tagged type inheritance hierarchy.
Consider using generics to provide extensibility of data types requiring the restrictions provided by protected objects.
