title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 3
section: concurrency
chunk: 64
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

d type inheritance hierarchy.
Consider using generics to provide extensibility of data types requiring the restrictions provided by protected objects.

=== communication ===
Minimize the work performed during a rendezvous .
Minimize the work performed in the selective accept loop of a task.
Consider using protected objects for data synchronization and communication.
Provide a handler for exception Program_Error whenever you cannot avoid a selectiveaccept statement whose alternatives can all be closed (Honeywell 1986).
Make systematic use of handlers for Tasking_Error.
Be prepared to handle exceptions during a rendezvous .
Consider using a when others exception handler.
Do not depend on the values of the task attributes 'Callable or 'Terminated (Nissen and Wallis 1984).
Do not depend on attributes to avoid Tasking_Error on an entry call.
For tasks, do not depend on the value of the entry attribute 'Count.
Using the 'Count attribute with protected entries is more reliable than using the 'Count attribute with task entries.
Use calls on protected subprograms or entries to pass data between tasks rather than unprotected shared variables.
Do not use unprotected shared variables as a task synchronization device.
Do not reference nonlocal variables in a guard .
If an unprotected shared variable is necessary, use the pragma Volatile or Atomic.
Use caution with conditional entry calls to task entries.
Use caution with selective accepts with else parts.
Do not depend upon a particular delay in timed entry calls to task entries.
Do not depend upon a particular delay in selective accepts with delay alternatives.
Consider using protected objects instead of the rendezvous for data-oriented synchronization.
Minimize the number of accept and select statements per task .
Minimize the number of accept statements per entry.
