title: Global Offshore Wind Infrastructure: Deployment and Operational Dynamics from Dense Sentinel-1 Time Series
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: global-offshore-wind-infrastructure-deployment-and-operational-dynamics-from-dense-sentinel-1-time-series
authors: Thorsten Hoeser; Felix Bachofer; Claudia Kuenzer
page: 2
section: abstract
chunk: 28
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20822v1

shows predicted event labels, the
upper and lower panels display corresponding 2D Sentinel-1 backscatter images and derived 1D backscatter profiles.
8

Global Offshore Wind Infrastructure: Deployment and Operational Dynamics from Dense Sentinel-1 Time Series
Figure 6: Time series compilation workflow, based on 15,606 offshore wind infrastructure spatial detections to efficiently
acquire 14.8 million Sentinel-1, 1D backscatter profiles with unique time and location relations.
To overcome this limitation, each of the 15,606 detection boxes was split client side into 10 m wide vertical columns
along the horizontal axis, resulting in 729,016 narrow spatial processing units. Instead of launching one GEE task per
column, boxes (not columns) were grouped into spatial batches under the following constraints:
• A batch includes all boxes within 15 km of a randomly selected seed box.
• A batch contains no more than 40 boxes.
The 15 km spatial threshold increases the likelihood that all boxes in a batch share common image footprints, minimizing
unnecessary NaN values due to partial coverage. The limit of 40 boxes per batch was determined empirically and
maintains high parallelism while preventing overly large export objects that may cause GEE task failures. Applying this
batching strategy resulted in 516 processing batches for the 15,606 detected locations.
Each GEE batch exported a CSV file. The tabular format was selected to allow inclusion of metadata alongside reduced
backscatter values. The data model contains:
•box_id: identifier of the parent detection box
•column_id: identifier of the 10 m column within the box
•max_value: maximum backscatter value for the column
•img_date: Sentinel-1 acquisition date
•orbit_direction: ascending or descending pass
9
