title: Global Offshore Wind Infrastructure: Deployment and Operational Dynamics from Dense Sentinel-1 Time Series
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: global-offshore-wind-infrastructure-deployment-and-operational-dynamics-from-dense-sentinel-1-time-series
authors: Thorsten Hoeser; Felix Bachofer; Claudia Kuenzer
page: 2
section: abstract
chunk: 30
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20822v1

urbine labels, subsets
of these labels are reassigned to the platform class, including cases where turbine foundation labels persist long after the
10

Global Offshore Wind Infrastructure: Deployment and Operational Dynamics from Dense Sentinel-1 Time Series
last deployed turbine occurrence. The final labels are written to the time series parquet files holding the corresponding
14,840,637 swath profiles.
To evaluate the performance of the rule-based classification, we examined and annotated 328,657 swath profiles of 553
time series randomly drawn from all 15,606 available time series. This benchmark data set is part of the data corpus
provided with this publication. We used two validation strategies, single event classification evaluation and time series
evaluation.
For single event evaluation, the ground-truth event labels in the benchmark dataset are compared against the labels
predicted by the rule-based classifier using a confusion matrix, from which class-wise Precision, Recall, and F1-scores
are derived, as well as overall and grouped macro averaged scores.
To complement these point wise scores with a sequence sensitive metric, we compute the edit similarity score. Edit
similarity is defined as the normalized Levenshtein distance [Levenshtein, 1966] between the ground-truth and predicted
label sequences, which we chose due to different sequence lengths of the time series:
EditSim(S, ˆS) = 1− dLev(S, ˆS)
max(|S|,| ˆS|)
,(4)
where dLev denotes the Levenshtein distance and |S| and | ˆS| are the sequence lengths. The Levenshtein distance
measures how many edit operations like insertions, deletions, or substitutions of labels are necessary to align the
predicted sequence with the ground-truth sequence, where fewer required edits express a higher similarity. Edit similarity
is computed in two variants. The first variant compares the full label sequences performing a point-wise evaluation,
thereby penalizing incorrect labels at any time step. Since this variant is conceptually close to a micro-averaged F1
score obtained from single-event evaluation, we additionally compute edit similarity on collapsed label sequences.
During collapsing, segments of identical labels are reduced to a single label. Collapsed edit similarity abstracts away
absolute event durations and focuses on the temporal ordering and presence of event phases. This variant penalizes
unnecessary transitions, incorrect event ordering, and missing or extra phases in the predicted sequence, making it
a suitable complementary metric to single-event evaluation. For benchmarking purposes, edit similarity is further
evaluated at uniformly spaced quality thresholds qs ∈[0,1] with a step size of 0.05. For each threshold, we compute the
fraction of time series with an edit similarity score greater than or equal to qs. The overall performance is summarized
as the area under the edit similarity-quality threshold curve (AUC).
5 Results
5.1 Dense SAR backscatter profile time series
As a primary outcome of this study, we provide a globally consistent, high-temporal-resolution time series dataset of
offshore wind infrastructure derived from Sentinel-1 SAR imagery available at Hoeser et al. [2026]. While an updated
set of offshore wind infrastructure locations for 2025Q1 is included as a structural foundation, the central contribution
lies in the analysis-ready time series data and the benchmark annotations.
The 14,840,637 analysis-ready 1D Sentinel-1 backscatter profiles spanning the period from 2016Q1 to 2025Q1 are a
starting point for detailed investigation and research in Earth Observation based offshore wind infrastructure monitoring
by complementing spatial detection approaches with high density, temporal infrastructure dynamics. Each backscatter
profile corresponds to a single acquisition at a detected offshore wind infrastructure location and preserves structurally
informative SAR signatures.
The temporal resolution and thus number of events of each time series directly reflects Sentinel-1 acquisition frequency.
During dataset engineering, we focused on extracting the densest possible time series from the Sentinel-1 archive. As
shown in figure 7, temporal resolution varies geographically. Regions within the European Union show dense coverage
corresponding to a higher number of events per time series due to higher acquisition frequencies and overlapping
Sentinel-1 orbits, especially at higher latitudes, resulting in revisit intervals of up to one day for certain locations. In
contrast, regions such as the Chinese EEZ generally follow the mission’s default 12-day revisit interval of a single
Sentinel-1 platform.
The provided 1D backscatter profiles are balancing feature richness, global completeness, and technical usability. The
objective was to construct a globally consistent dataset at maximal temporal resolution while preserving SAR features
necessary for detailed deployment-phase analysis for a broad user audience, with different computational resources.
11
