title: Global Offshore Wind Infrastructure: Deployment and Operational Dynamics from Dense Sentinel-1 Time Series
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: global-offshore-wind-infrastructure-deployment-and-operational-dynamics-from-dense-sentinel-1-time-series
authors: Thorsten Hoeser; Felix Bachofer; Claudia Kuenzer
page: 2
section: abstract
chunk: 31
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20822v1

n while preserving SAR features
necessary for detailed deployment-phase analysis for a broad user audience, with different computational resources.
11

Global Offshore Wind Infrastructure: Deployment and Operational Dynamics from Dense Sentinel-1 Time Series
Figure 7: Global and regional distributions for the number of events per time series and the median number of days
between time series events.
The 14.8 million 1D backscatter profiles need about 5 GB of storage, enabling broad accessibility without requiring
large-scale computational infrastructure. In contrast, storing the corresponding 2D Sentinel-1 image patches would
increase data volume by an estimated factor of 25, significantly limiting usability to users with advanced computing
resources.
5.2 Global Offshore Wind Infrastructure Detection
With the updated two stage object detection workflow based on Hoeser et al. [2022], we identified 15,606 offshore
wind infrastructure across the entire global EEZ based on Sentinel-1 VH-polarized GRD imagery reduced to a 2025Q1
median composite. Of these, 15,100 were subsequently classified as offshore wind turbines in the time series analysis,
see figure 1.
At global scale, two dominant offshore wind hotspots exist: the Chinese EEZ and the North Sea Basin (NSB). Figure 8
illustrates the bounding boxes of offshore wind farm regions detected by the first-stage, which scans the global coastline
and offshore areas. Zoomed examples further demonstrate detections of individual offshore wind infrastructure units
identified by the second-stage within these candidate regions.
Ongoing expansion of the offshore wind energy sector introduce new spatial layouts that challenge detection models.
Figure 9 highlights complex environments such as harbours and near-coastal environments, where offshore wind
turbines may be located close to piers or connecting infrastructure. Such sites pose recall challenges, increasing the
risk of false omissions. Especially the wind farm layouts along the southeast coast of Vietnam represent challenging
patterns that differ from typical patterns in the NSB or Chinese EEZ. At the same time, precision is challenged by
coastal and harbour infrastructure with radar signatures similar to these layouts.
Detection performance across the three validation sites, the East China Sea, the NSB, and Southeast Vietnam is
summarized in figure 10 using Precision, Recall, and F1 score. Across all validation sites, performance ranges from
95.2% to 100% for individual metrics. The overall macro-averaged F1 score is 98.1%, indicating robust global detection
performance. The lowest metric observed is a Recall of 95.2% in the NSB. The false omissions belong mainly to a large
cluster of turbine foundations under construction at the Dogger Bank, which were not identified as candidate wind farm
regions in the first-stage detection of the applied workflow. Overall, the updated detection workflow provides a well
performing and globally consistent spatial foundation for the subsequent high-temporal-resolution time series analysis.
5.3 Time series classification
For the 15,606 detected offshore wind infrastructure locations, we classified 15,606 corresponding time series with a
total of 14,840,637 event labels. Six semantic classes are distinguished: water, turbine foundation, deployed turbine,
support platform, mooring / construction vessel, and vessel.
Validation was performed on a benchmark subset of 553 expert-annotated time series containing 328,657 event labels.
On the two important summary metrics, the area under the collapsed edit similarity-quality threshold curve (AUC) and
the macro F1 score of event-based comparison, the proposed classifier performed with AUC of 0.785 and an F1 of 0.84.
12
