title: Global Offshore Wind Infrastructure: Deployment and Operational Dynamics from Dense Sentinel-1 Time Series
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: global-offshore-wind-infrastructure-deployment-and-operational-dynamics-from-dense-sentinel-1-time-series
authors: Thorsten Hoeser; Felix Bachofer; Claudia Kuenzer
page: 2
section: abstract
chunk: 34
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20822v1

ial alignment with the ground truth data.
In figures 13 and 14 we illustrate representative classified time series in spatial and temporal context.
15

Global Offshore Wind Infrastructure: Deployment and Operational Dynamics from Dense Sentinel-1 Time Series
Figure 12: Fraction of Time Series with Edit Similarity scores higher than a given threshold at different threshold levels
with corresponding AUC values on step-wise and collapsed classified time series.
In the NSB, deployment phases are clearly separated into distinct foundation construction and turbine installation stages,
with a high vessel interaction during peak construction periods. In contrast, examples from the Chinese EEZ show a
less distinct separation between foundation and turbine deployment stages. The lag between foundation construction
and turbine installation, commonly observed in NSB sites, is often absent, resulting in shorter overall construction
durations per turbine. However, vessel interaction patterns remain consistent across regions, with higher event density
during construction compared to operational phases.
Using the classified time series, we derive regional deployment duration estimates by identifying the dates of first
turbine foundation detection and first deployed turbine detection for each site and computing the elapsed time between
these phases. The comparison of China, the European Union, and the United Kingdom shows significantly shorter
deployment durations within the Chinese EEZ, see figure 15, which supports the observed differences in the example
time series. These results demonstrate how high density, temporal classification enables large-scale analysis of regional
deployment patterns.
To illustrate the sensitivity of the classified time series to operational events at a local scale, we present the case study of
maintenance events at Hywind Scotland. Figure 16 presents results for the Hywind Scotland floating wind farm. In
2024, all five turbines were temporarily towed back to Norway for maintenance. According to official reports from
Global Maritime [Global Maritime, 2024], maintenance began on 2024-05-17, with the first turbine towed back to
Norway reaching the port on 2024-05-24. The first turbine returned on 2024-07-05, and the final turbine on 2024-09-22.
These documented events align closely with the observed and classified time series. The classification captures the
absence of deployed turbine signatures during the maintenance periods. This case study provides an example, that the
time series data of this publication provides temporally detailed insights exceeding those available from summarized
reports, demonstrating the capability of the dataset to detect and contextualize operational dynamics at individual sites.
16
