title: Global Offshore Wind Infrastructure: Deployment and Operational Dynamics from Dense Sentinel-1 Time Series
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: global-offshore-wind-infrastructure-deployment-and-operational-dynamics-from-dense-sentinel-1-time-series
authors: Thorsten Hoeser; Felix Bachofer; Claudia Kuenzer
page: 2
section: abstract
chunk: 39
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20822v1

quisition and near-real-time
detection strategies and hybrid approaches that balance recall for early foundations with precision in complex coastal
21

Global Offshore Wind Infrastructure: Deployment and Operational Dynamics from Dense Sentinel-1 Time Series
environments. For time series interpretation, the complexity required for a handcrafted rule-based classifier indicates
that learned sequential models and multi-source data fusion (e.g., AIS and optical) are promising future research areas.
Overall, the released corpus establishes a foundation for future advancements in offshore wind infrastructure monitoring
from space by combining global coverage, high temporal resolution, analysis-ready time series, baseline predictions,
and expert annotations as benchmark data set. It enables in-depth investigation of offshore wind deployment and
operation at scale and supports the development, evaluation, and benchmarking of temporal methods for independent
monitoring of this rapidly expanding critical infrastructure.
Data Availability
The dataset is publicly available on Zenodo at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5933966 [Hoeser et al., 2026].
Abbreviations
AIS Automatic Identification System
AUC Area Under the Curve
CFAR Constant False Alarm Rate
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
CSV Comma Separated Value
DLR German Aerospace Center (Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt)
EEZ Exclusive Economic Zone
ESA European Space Agency
EO Earth Observation
FN False Negative
FP False Positive
GDAL Geospatial Data Abstraction Library
GEE Google Earth Engine
GRD Ground Range Detected
GTI GDAL Tile Index
HPC High Performance Computing
HS Hywind Scotland
IW Interferometric Wide
NRT Near Real-Time
NSB North Sea Basin
OWT Offshore Wind Turbine
SAR Synthetic Aperture Radar
TP True Positive
TS Time Series
VH Vertical transmit, Horizontal receive
YOLO You Only Look Once
Author contributions
TH and CK designed the study. TH labelled the ground truth data; developed and implemented the code for data
processing, visualization, and evaluation; and prepared the original manuscript, including figures. CK and FB supervised
the study, gave suggestions for figures, and repeatedly commented on and discussed the manuscript.
Competing interests
The contact author has declared that none of the authors has any competing interests.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the Copernicus program of the European Space Agency (ESA) for providing free
access to Sentinel-1 data. We also thank DLR’s Terrabyte team for their dedicated efforts in platform operations, which
enabled the deep learning experiments, synthetic training data generation, and large-scale inference.
22
