title: A Neutral Look at Operating Systems
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: a-neutral-look-at-operating-systems
authors: 
page: 9
section: mac-os
chunk: 45
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/A_Neutral_Look_at_Operating_Systems

THIS ARTICLE IS QUITE OUTDATED. PLEASE HELP MODERNIZE IT

=== Classic Mac OS ===
Mac OS was introduced in 1984, after the Apple Lisa project. The earlier OSs were very simple and used a monochrome color scheme.
Macintoshes have built in speakers. When one is turned on, a chime sounds, indicating successful hardware detection. The loading of these early OSs involve several grey screens, depending on the type of hardware installed. The first thing to appear is a movable mouse arrow. Common error messages include a Question Mark on top of either a folder or a diskette. Occasionally startup errors occur, some of which can be resolved by themselves. An example is a question mark appears on a folder for several seconds, alternating with the Finder logo and finishing with the Finder Logo. Another grey screen appears with a successful startup message. The successful startup message is called "Happy Mac", which is a picture of an 1984-era Macintosh with a smiley face on its display screen. A system failure can present "Sad Mac". These images later evolved into iPods, such as the "Sad iPod" image. Sad Mac can also be accompanied with sound effects, such as glass shattering or a car crashing.
The fact that the Mac OS has the mouse arrow loading first, instead of last, means that the Mac OS is more GUI-oriented and does not include a command line interface.
The Operating System loads, usually with a seamless transition to the desktop by gradually loading parts of the desktop. It begins with a Splash Screen, main extensions loading, and then the Menu Bar loads. The installed extensions load, often taking over one minute to load depending on the number of extensions, and then the desktop icons and any application switchers load.
The first Mac OSs, or Systems, were very basic and had very little release numbers. 1.0 jumped directly to 2.0 for example. Also there isn't any multitasking available on very early Mac OSs.
System 7 was the first OS with noticeable improvements. OS 8 included more improvements.
Software that can be installed on these OSs include many games and After Dark screen saver packages.
The last version of OS 9, and the last version to use the original Mac OS source code, is 9.2.2. You can see that it contains an early version of the Aqua and Brushed Metal color schemes. Additionally, iTunes, QuickTime, Sherlock 2, and a few other applications use a brushed metal appearance similar to OS X.
Also with Mac OS, a monochrome Pinwheel mouse cursor is used to indicate that the system was busy. It would occasionally be shared with the mouse arrow cursor. Other busy cursors is a monochrome watch that usually does not have its needles, or "hands", move. Occasionally the minute hand moves. Another icon (not a cursor) is a circle with two monochrome arrows rotating clockwise. This resembles the rotating Lou Scheimer-Norm Prescott production logo. In OS X, Two of these busy signals would be updated. The monochrome pinwheel was replaced with a color one, and used more often instead of the watch. The pinwheel would not be shared with the mouse arrow cursor. The two arrows was replaced with several lines arranged in a circle. The watch was not updated and only appears occasionally.
9.2.2 and earlier are not supported by Apple, Inc. Software Update will not function. Additionally, there isn't any Yahoo Messenger that will function on 9.2.2 and earlier. Podcasting is impossible with 9.2.2. Many applications are only released as Disk Images or .dmg files which are not read by 9.2.2 and earlier. 9.2.2 and earlier can not mount any case sensitive volumes. Mac OS 9.2.2 CAN load most graphic images such as JPEG, and can also open up .sit, .iso, .smi, and .bin files.
Mac OS X server was released before 9.2.2, and the rest of the operating systems transitioned to the NeXTstep OS-like OS X.
