title: A Neutral Look at Operating Systems
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: a-neutral-look-at-operating-systems
authors: 
page: 9
section: mac-os
chunk: 47
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/A_Neutral_Look_at_Operating_Systems

ers.
9.2.2 also has some compatibility with hardware that was made after its release. This includes USB storage devices, and wide screen LCD monitors.

=== Mac OS X ===
Mac OS X ("ten") is the current version of the proprietary OS made by Apple Computer. It is largely based on the NeXT operating system and the Macintosh System Software. Apple also produces Mac OS X Server, which is geared towards high-end computing needs, such as clustering and remote management of individual CPUs. Apple promotes Mac OS X as being more user-friendly than its competitors' operating systems with a powerful UNIX foundation. Mac OS X has been 64-bit compatible since version 10.3, allowing it to run on the G5 processor.
Backwards compatibility with Mac OS 9 and earlier was maintained by using the "Classic" and "Carbon" environments. Carbon is a cleaned-up version of the old Mac API, designed to run well on MacOS X. Classic is the new term for the old Mac API, cruftyness and all. Classic apps suffer from some limitations, in much the same way that old Windows 3.1 apps suffer in the WoW environment of Windows.
Older Macintosh technologies, such as QuickTime and Keychain, were incorporated into the design of OS X with other predominantly NeXT technologies, such as the Dock and its kernel. Although the Macintosh System Software is proprietary in origin, NeXT's operating system was developed from Open Source BSD. Much of the Darwin kernel can be traced back to NeXT. Darwin remains publicly available: As a PowerPC binary, an Intel-x86 binary, and as source code (Binary versions are available for major revisions, such as 10.0, 10.1, 10.2, etc.). Many of the graphics routines stem from the Macintosh QuickDraw graphics routines, which were updated and renamed "Quartz" in Mac OS X 10.2 (a.k.a. "Jaguar").
Recent versions of computers running Mac OS X include "iApps", such as iTunes (jukebox software), and iLife applications, including iPhoto (a picture organizing application), iMovie (a non-linear video editor), etc. Remember: most of these applications do not come as part of the operating system, but rather are pre-installed.
At its launch, Mac OS X was criticized by many users as being more NeXT-like than Mac-like. It was also criticized due to its heavy memory requirement (128 megabytes), narrow scope of supported processors (PowerPC 604, G3, and G4), size on hard disk (approximately 2 gigabytes), and its relatively drastic user interface change from Mac OS 9 to Mac OS X, leaving many users feeling unfamiliar with the operating system. There were also minor complaints, such as the disappearance of the "Happy Mac" (an icon displayed on the screen at startup to indicate a successful self-test result). Also hampering support for Mac OS X was a lack of "Carbonized" software, such as Microsoft's Office software suite, and Adobe's Photoshop image editing program.
The Microsoft Windows GUI (Graphical User Interface) and the Aqua window manager of Mac OS X differ cosmetically, but both use the same desktop paradigm. The main differences are in widget, icon, and menu bar placement. The menu bar placement is reportedly in conformance with Fitt's Law for interface design. Among Apple's distinguishing interface design features is its one-button mouse and command key. While Microsoft Windows expects the use of a two-button mouse (and on some Linux and Unix OSs, three), Apple has used a one-button mouse since the introduction of the Macintosh in 1984, and uses the control key on the keyboard as a click-modifier (called "control-click"), analogous to the Microsoft Windows "right-click". However, Apple does make a multi-button mouse called the Mighty Mouse which is available separately, and third party multi-button USB mice can also be used. Finally, the command key is dedicated to the purpose of selecting menu items by its keyboard-based equivalent.
