title: Coverage, Not Averages: Semantic Stratification for Trustworthy Retrieval Evaluation
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: coverage-not-averages-semantic-stratification-for-trustworthy-retrieval-evaluation
authors: Andrew Klearman; Radu Revutchi; Rohin Garg; Rishav Chakravarti; Samuel Marc Denton; Yuan Xue
page: 15
section: when-in-doubt
chunk: 52
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20763v1

ents use consistent domain terminology with distinctive named entities,
validating that retrieval works well when lexical-semantic alignment holds.
26

Coverage, Not Averages Semantic Stratification for Trustworthy Retrieval Evaluation
F. Additional Related Work
The evaluation of Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has evolved from lexical n-gram matching to principled
methodologies that isolate the performance of retrieval and generation components.
IR Evaluation.Modern RAG evaluation inherits methodology from information retrieval research such as the Text
REtrieval Conference (TREC) which established standardized test collections, relevance judgments, and evaluation metrics
(Chowdhury, 2007). These efforts culminated in unified Question Answering (QA) benchmarks like BEIR (Thakur et al.,
2021), which aggregates 18 diverse and foundational sets like NQ, HotpotQA, TriviaQA, and MS MARCO (Kwiatkowski
et al., 2019; Joshi et al., 2017; Nguyen et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2018).
RAG Benchmarks.Modern RAG-specific benchmarks extend these foundations to target specific RAG failure modes.
MultiHop-RAG requires synthesis across multiple documents (Tang & Yang, 2024). CRAG provides question-answer
pairs spanning five domains with varying entity popularity, temporal dynamics, and complexity (Yang et al., 2024). For
corpus-level reasoning, GlobalQA introduces aggregation tasks such as counting, sorting, and top-k extraction over entire
collections (Luo et al., 2025). Long 2RAG addresses long-context scenarios with the Key Point Recall metric for evaluating
generation (Qi et al., 2024), MT-RAG benchmarks multi-turn conversational RAG with human-generated dialogues (IBM
Research, 2025), mmRAG (Xu et al., 2025) tackles heterogeneous knowledge sources, and QE-RAG (Zhang et al., 2025)
evaluates robustness to query entry errors such as typos and keyboard proximity mistakes.
Query Taxonomies and Curation.Principled curation by defining taxonomies that reflect real-world difficulty. Teixeira de
Lima et al. (2025) proposed a taxonomy classifying context-query pairs into predefined categories such as fact single,
summary, reasoning, and unanswerable categories to identify specific retrieval challenges. The CRUD-RAG
benchmark further organizes tasks into Create, Read, Update, and Delete operations to evaluate RAG systems in scenarios
beyond standard question-answering, such as text continuation and hallucination modification (Lyu et al., 2025).
Corpus Stratification.Works like GraphRAG (Edge et al., 2025), RAPTOR (Sarthi et al., 2024), and HippoRAG (Guti´errez
et al., 2024) have explored corpus stratification to improve retrieval efficiency and quality. GraphRAG’s stratification is
most similar to ours as it constructs clusters using the Leiden algorithm (Traag et al., 2019) after LLM-prompt based entity
and relationship extraction. Our approach differs in that relationships are detected directly in the semantic space and the
stratification is used to inform benchmark diagnosis and repair rather than retrieval optimization.
Synthetic Data Generation (SDG).To overcome the bottleneck of manual annotation, frameworks like RAGEval and
Long2RAG employ schema-based pipelines to generate grounded documents, questions, and answers (Zhu et al., 2025; Qi
et al., 2024). Similarly, DataMorgana provides a customizable framework to control the lexical, syntactic, and semantic
diversity of generated benchmarks, ensuring they reflect the expected traffic of enterprise applications (Filice et al., 2025).
Efficient Evaluation under Budget Constraints.Complementary work reduces annotation costs via strategic item selection:
active learning for IR test collections (Rahman et al., 2020), minimal test collections (Carterette et al., 2006), and compact
LLM benchmarks (Polo et al., 2024). These approaches select items based on model uncertainty or statistical informativeness;
in contrast, our framework prioritizes corpus-informed coverage independent of the systems being evaluated.
27
