title: Participatory provenance as representational auditing for AI-mediated public consultation
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: participatory-provenance-as-representational-auditing-for-ai-mediated-public-consultation
authors: Sachit Mahajan
page: 1
section: 4
chunk: 2
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20711v1

19

whereˆπ(Xi) =P(T i = 1|X i)is the estimated propensity score andˆµt(Xi) =E[Y|T=t, X i]the
estimated potential outcome under treatmentt. The estimator is consistent if either the propensity score model or the outcome model is correctly specified [Scharfstein et al., 1999]. The propensity
scorewasestimatedbylogisticregressiononcovariatesX i = (logword count,sentence count,semantic isolation,hedge rate,assertiveness rate).
The outcome model was estimated by OLS on the same covariates. Standard errors were derived
from the AIPW influence function; covariate balance was assessed via standardised mean differences
(SMD), which were below 0.10 after weighting for all covariates and both topics.
Four binary treatment variables were constructed from participant text features.Short response
(is_short): indicator for the bottom word-count quintile (≤Q 20 of the marginal distribution),
capturingtheeffectofresponsebrevity.Semantically isolated(is_isolated): indicatorforsemantic
distance to the nearest cluster centroid in the top two quintiles (≥Q60), capturing the degree
to which a participant occupies a minority position within the opinion space.Assertive register
(is_assertive): indicator for assertiveness rate above the corpus median, where assertiveness rate
is the proportion of tokens matching a compiled lexical pattern for imperative constructions, modal
certainty phrases (must, shall, requires, essential, critical, imperative, absolutely) and declarative
demand forms.Hedged register(is_hedged): indicator for hedge rate above corpus median, where
hedge rate is the proportion of tokens matching epistemic-uncertainty markers (perhaps, maybe,
might, could, possibly, I think, I believe, in my opinion, arguably, conceivably).
As a complementary analysis, OLS regression was fitted with the four binary treatments plus
all pairwise interaction terms as predictors ofc(i). All continuous predictors were standardised
(zero mean, unit variance) before fitting, so that coefficients are directly interpretable as effect
sizes in coverage-score units. Heteroskedasticity-consistent HC3 standard errors [MacKinnon and
White, 1985] were used throughout. Intersectional effects were tested via the pairwise interaction
coefficients; full results for both topics are reported in Supplementary Tables 10 and 11.
4.6 Concept fidelity and epistemic grounding
To characterise what conceptual content survives into the summary, keyphrases were extracted
from each participant text and from each summary sentence using KeyBERT [Grootendorst, 2020]
(Maximal Marginal Relevance, diversity penaltyλ= 0.5), targeting ten keyphrases per text unit.
A keyphrase was considered a match if its stemmed token representation appeared in the other
keyphrase set (exact token match on Porter-stemmed forms). Forward recall was computed as
the fraction of participant corpus keyphrases appearing in the summary keyphrase set; backward
precision as the fraction of summary keyphrases traceable to at least one participant text.
Concept transformation was classified for each matched keyphrase pair using GPT-4o-mini (5
independent API calls per pair, majority vote across runs). The classification distinguished:preserved(same propositional content and valence),softened(attenuated strength or urgency relative
to the participant text), andabstracted(raised to a higher level of generality without preserving
the participant’s specificity). Fleiss’κ[Fleiss, 1971] was computed across the five annotation runs
as the primary measure of inter-run reliability; results withκ <0.60were excluded from the main
analysis (Trust:κ= 0.682, reliable; Education:κ= 0.768, reliable).
Epistemic grounding classified each summary sentence asexplicitif its mean cosine similarity
to its top-k= 10nearest participant texts exceeded 0.55, andinferredotherwise; the 0.55 threshold
was calibrated by inspection of the bimodal similarity distribution across all summary sentences,
lying below the dense cluster of high-similarity explicit sentences (≥0.65) and above the lowsimilarity inferred cluster (≤0.49) (Education: 3 explicit, 3 inferred; Trust: 5 explicit, 1 inferred).
Stance alignment compared the directional framing of each summary sentence against the dominant
directional stance of its top-10 nearest participant texts, classifying the relationship asaligned,
20
