title: Generative Flow Networks for Model Adaptation in Digital Twins of Natural Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: generative-flow-networks-for-model-adaptation-in-digital-twins-of-natural-systems
authors: Pascal Archambault; Houari Sahraoui; Eugene Syriani
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 68
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20707v1

mulator trajectories toward the measured behavior. Atsf= 0.15,
the differences between retrieved trajectories remain relatively modest, whereas the
25

sf= 0.3 setting makes the contrast clearer: the retrieved configurations remain much
closer to the observations than the initial state, while the adaptive baseline tends
to overshoot cumulative dry mass more strongly. In that sense, the figure provides
an interpretable bridge between state-space retrieval quality and the physical-system
trajectories that motivate adaptation.
Taken together, these results show that the learned policy is not only capable
of reproducing the dominant structure of the target distribution, but is also useful
as a retrieval mechanism for strong simulator parameterizations. The close agreement in ranked probability profiles, the repeated recovery of target top-kstates, and
the improved best-so-far performance all indicate that the GFlowNet supportsR1
in practice: it remains sufficiently grounded in the adaptation landscape to retrieve
parameterizations that are well aligned with the observations. At the same time,
because this retrieval performance is achieved through a learned distribution rather
than through a single deterministic calibration, the approach satisfiesR2.
5.3.3 Scalability
RQ3explores how the proposed approach behaves when the adaptation problem is
scaled beyond the enumerable 1-cycle regime. To study this question, we consider the
2-cycle setting, where the number of reachable terminal configurations increases substantially and the exact target distribution is no longer available. In this regime, the
evaluation focuses on retrieval quality, diversity among the strongest retrieved candidates, and qualitative agreement with the observed trajectories rather than on exact
distributional fidelity. We restrict the analysis toβ= 4. This choice was motivated by
the need to keep the reward landscape smooth enough to remain conducive to learning
while still sharp enough to retrieve high-reward samples.
26
