title: Generative Flow Networks for Model Adaptation in Digital Twins of Natural Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: generative-flow-networks-for-model-adaptation-in-digital-twins-of-natural-systems
authors: Pascal Archambault; Houari Sahraoui; Eugene Syriani
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 69
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20707v1

ed by
the need to keep the reward landscape smooth enough to remain conducive to learning
while still sharp enough to retrieve high-reward samples.
26

(a) Equal-budget comparison forsf= 0.15, β= 4
(b) Equal-budget comparison forsf= 0.3, β= 4
Fig. 11Equal-budget comparison in the 2-cycle setting for the representativeβ= 4 case under two
step fractions. Best loss and median top-20 loss evaluate the quality of the retrieved states, while the
mean Hamming distance among the top retrieved states measures how broadly each method explores
distinct high-quality regions of the search space.
Fig. 11 evaluates retrieval quality and diversity after the same simulation budget.
The two loss-based quantities capture complementary aspects of retrieval quality. Best
loss measures the quality of the single strongest state found by each method, whereas
median top-20 loss indicates whether good performance is limited to one isolated
configuration or extends to a broader set of strong candidates. The mean Hamming
distance among the top retrieved states measures diversity: larger values indicate that
the strongest retrieved candidates are distributed across more distinct regions of the
search space rather than concentrated around near-duplicate solutions, since their keys
differ by a greater amount.
Under this equal-budget comparison, the GFlowNet remains competitive with TPE
on the quality measures while maintaining a substantially broader spread of highquality candidates. Atsf= 0.15, the two methods remain close in terms of best loss
and median top-20 loss, but the Hamming distance clearly separates them, showing
that the learned policy explores a more diverse set of promising configurations. At
sf= 0.3, the GFlowNet becomes more favorable on the quality measures as well, while
still preserving this broader diversity. This indicates that, even in the larger 2-cycle
regime, the learned policy does not collapse onto a narrow subset of configurations, but
continues to retrieve strong candidates from multiple regions of the parameter space.
At the same time, random search performs strongly in both settings, and especially
in the coarsersf= 0.3 regime. This should not be read as evidence that uninformed
sampling is intrinsically competitive with a learned retrieval policy, but rather as a
consequence of the enlarged 2-cycle state space and of the limited simulator budget
available to train the GFlowNet. In this regime, the learned policy can still retrieve
states with lower loss than random search, but it no longer separates itself as clearly
27
