title: Generative Flow Networks for Model Adaptation in Digital Twins of Natural Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: generative-flow-networks-for-model-adaptation-in-digital-twins-of-natural-systems
authors: Pascal Archambault; Houari Sahraoui; Eugene Syriani
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 72
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20707v1

ever, this also makes the adaptation problem substantially
harder to solve. In both settings, the retrieved configurations improve clearly over the
29

initial state, which remains visibly misaligned with the observations, but the differences between methods become more modest and more team-dependent than in the
1-cycle case. Atsf= 0.15, many of the retrieved trajectories remain fairly close to one
another, which is consistent with the small separation observed in the equal-budget
comparison. Atsf= 0.3, the contrast becomes clearer, but no single method dominates uniformly across all teams. This supports the broader interpretation ofRQ3:
scaling increases the expressive flexibility of the search space, but with simulation as
the main bottleneck, identifying those better-fitting regions reliably becomes a much
more difficult problem.
Taken together, these results show that the proposed approach continues to support bothR1andR2when the adaptation problem is scaled to the 2-cycle regime,
but that its practical effectiveness is currently limited by amortization cost. Under a
matched retrieval budget, the GFlowNet remains competitive and continues to preserve a broad set of plausible candidate states, which is consistent withR2. At the
same time, it remains capable of retrieving parameterizations that are well aligned
with the observations, which supportsR1, albeit in a lesser capacity than the 1-cycle
case. However, the time required to fit the learned policy remains substantial, and this
now constitutes the main performance bottleneck of the approach. In that sense, the
2-cycle results do not contradict the generative objective of the method. They show
instead that further improvements in evaluation efficiency, batching, or surrogate support will be needed before amortized generative retrieval can be fully exploited at this
scale.
5.4 Discussion
This study examined whether GFlowNet-based adaptation can satisfyR1andR2
for digital twins of natural systems, where sparse and noisy observations often make
simulator calibration underdetermined. The results suggest that the answer is positive
in the enumerable 1-cycle regime, and only partially so at larger scale. In the 1cycle setting, the learned policy recovered the dominant structure of the adaptation
landscape, remained closely aligned with the exact target distribution, and retrieved
parameterizations whose simulated trajectories matched the observations. In the 2cycle setting, the same qualitative behavior persisted, but amortization costs grew
substantially with the size of the search space.
The clearest evidence forR2comes fromRQ1. In the enumerable regime, the
learned policy did not collapse onto a single optimum and instead preserved several
plausible high-quality regions of the landscape. This property is essential for digital
twins of natural systems, where multiple simulator parameterizations may remain consistent with the available evidence. Preserving several plausible candidates is therefore
not incidental to adaptation, but part of what makes it useful for downstream tasks
such as monitoring, prediction, and prescription.
Conversely, RQ2 provides the clearest support forR1. In the 1-cycle setting, the
ranked probability comparisons, top-krecovery results, retrieval curves, and beststate overlays all indicate that the learned policy remains sufficiently grounded in
the adaptation landscape to recover parameterizations whose simulated trajectories
are well aligned with the observations. This complements the interpretation of RQ1
30
