title: Generative Flow Networks for Model Adaptation in Digital Twins of Natural Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: generative-flow-networks-for-model-adaptation-in-digital-twins-of-natural-systems
authors: Pascal Archambault; Houari Sahraoui; Eugene Syriani
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 73
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20707v1

dscape to recover parameterizations whose simulated trajectories
are well aligned with the observations. This complements the interpretation of RQ1
30

directly. If RQ1 shows that the learned policy preserves the relevant structure of
the landscape, RQ2 shows that this structure is not merely descriptive, but can be
exploited to retrieve strong, observation-aligned configurations in practice.
RQ3then shows how both conclusions change when we increase the possible state
space. In the 2-cycle regime, the learned policy continues to retrieve strong candidates
and to maintain a broader spread of promising configurations than TPE, which suggests thatR2is retained at least in part in the enlarged search space. Support forR1,
however, becomes more conditional. The learned policy remains competitive under a
matched retrieval budget, but its separation from TPE and from random search is substantially reduced. We interpret this not as a breakdown of the formulation itself, but
as evidence that the available simulator budget is insufficient to amortize the enlarged
landscape to the point where the retrieval advantage remains decisive.
The main limitation revealed by these results is computational rather than conceptual. The 2-cycle regime substantially increases the number of reachable terminal
configurations, and simulator evaluation becomes the dominant bottleneck. In the
present setup, fitting the GFlowNet required many hours of training, yet this investment was still insufficient to fully amortize the larger landscape. A second limitation
concerns the induced reward landscape itself. When the landscape is relatively flat,
many states achieve similar losses, which weakens the separation between informed
and uninformed exploration and can make random search appear more competitive
than it would under a sharper regime. This flatness also affects the learned sampler. If such a landscape were matched exactly, very high-reward states could remain
rarely sampled simply because of the sheer size of the state space. The GFlowNet
mechanism addresses this to some extent through proportional sampling over the
reward landscape. As observed inRQ2, different values ofβaffected the norm of the
learned distribution. By adjusting this norm, probability mass can be concentrated
more strongly on top-ranked states, which helps support the sampling of high-reward
calibration hypotheses in downstream digital twin services.
Even with these limitations, the results remain encouraging for digital twins of
natural systems. They show that a generative adaptation service can preserve multiple plausible parameterizations while still retrieving strong ones, which is precisely the
combination required when observations are destructive, costly, or sparsely distributed
in time. The main challenge exposed by the present study is therefore efficiency:
progress at larger scale will depend on better batching, stronger caching strategies, or
surrogate support that enables more effective amortization of larger search spaces.
5.5 Threats to validity
Internal validity .The reported results depend on several experimental choices. The
adaptation landscape is induced by a specific grouped perturbation design, reward
formulation, and simulator-based loss definition, all of which affect the relative difficulty of the retrieval problem for GFlowNet, TPE, and random search. In addition,
the 1-cycle and 2-cycle regimes support different forms of evidence: the former benefits from an exact enumerable target distribution, whereas the latter can only be
assessed through retrieval-based comparisons. The number of seeds and computational
31
