title: Generative Flow Networks for Model Adaptation in Digital Twins of Natural Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: generative-flow-networks-for-model-adaptation-in-digital-twins-of-natural-systems
authors: Pascal Archambault; Houari Sahraoui; Eugene Syriani
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 74
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20707v1

enumerable target distribution, whereas the latter can only be
assessed through retrieval-based comparisons. The number of seeds and computational
31

budgets also remains limited, and caching affects wall-clock time by reducing simulator effort unevenly across runs. Further, our experiments were performed on clusters
with shared access across our institutions, thus computing power was not consistent
throughout model training. Finally, flatter reward landscapes reduce the separation
between strong and mediocre candidates, which can make random search appear more
competitive than it would under a sharper target distribution.
External validity .The evaluation was conducted on a single mechanistic greenhouse simulator in controlled environment agriculture, with one grouped perturbation
design, two step fractions, a narrow range of reward sharpness settings, and baselines
centered on TPE and random search. The conclusions therefore support the feasibility of GFlowNet-based adaptation for digital twins of natural systems in this setting,
but they do not establish that the same results will transfer unchanged to other simulators, crops, sensing regimes, or adaptation services. Broader generality will need
to be assessed across other natural-system domains, other simulator structures, and
larger search spaces where the computational bottlenecks identified here may manifest
differently.
6 Related Works
This section situates the proposed approach with respect to three complementary lines
of work. We first review model-driven engineering research on digital twins, focusing
on lifecycle management, adaptation, and the role of model artifacts and services.
We then discuss digital twins of natural and biological systems, where uncertainty,
indirect observations, and evolving operating contexts make simulator adaptation
particularly challenging. Finally, we examine simulation-based inference and recent
generative approaches for likelihood-free parameter inference in mechanistic models,
in order to clarify how the present work differs from existing posterior-estimation and
calibration-oriented formulations.
6.1 Model-driven engineering for digital twins
Systematic engineering of digital twins has emerged as a distinct MDE research
agenda, with early work outlining its foundational challenges around model heterogeneity, synchronization across abstractions, and lifecycle-wide coordination [29].
Recent synthesis work extends this agenda by aligning MDE capabilities with digital
twin engineering needs across the lifecycle [10], by providing a systematic mapping of
MDE techniques applied to digital twins [30], and by mapping the broader software
engineering landscape [31]. On lifecycle management and self-adaptation, declarative
formulations treat the twin and its physical counterpart as a coupled system evolving across lifecycle stages [32], while notational approaches reason about continuous
digital twin evolution [33]. Our work contributes to this line of research by treating
model adaptation as an explicit digital twin service and as the inference mechanism
that refreshes the mechanistic simulator when new evidence justifies it, while locating
this service within the design phase of the digital twin lifecycle.
32
