title: Generative Flow Networks for Model Adaptation in Digital Twins of Natural Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: generative-flow-networks-for-model-adaptation-in-digital-twins-of-natural-systems
authors: Pascal Archambault; Houari Sahraoui; Eugene Syriani
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 75
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20707v1

reshes the mechanistic simulator when new evidence justifies it, while locating
this service within the design phase of the digital twin lifecycle.
32

6.2 Digital twins of natural and biological systems
Digital twins of natural systems remain less established but are directly relevant to
our setting. Prior work in greenhouse-based cyber-biophysical systems identifies simulator construction, uncertainty handling, and adaptation as central challenges [3], and
has produced self-adaptation architectures that distinguish behavioral from structural
adaptation [34]. Our contribution sits in the behavioral layer and replaces pointwise
parameter tuning with reward-proportional sampling over complete simulator configurations. In smart farming more broadly, control-oriented digital twin frameworks have
been proposed [35], though recent reviews report that robust predictive capabilities
remain limited in practice [14]. In biomedicine, digital twins have been grounded in
probabilistic graphical models [9], with uncertainty quantification discussed as a central concern across the lifecycle [15]. Despite their domain differences, these systems
share a common modeling difficulty: observations are typically partial, heterogeneous,
and obtained at the level of system behavior rather than directly at the level of
simulator parameters. Maintaining several plausible simulator configurations is thus
valuable because it preserves adaptation uncertainty in a form that can still support
downstream prediction, what-if analysis, and decision-making.
6.3 Simulation-based inference and generative modeling
Calibration under intractable likelihoods is typically addressed through approximate
Bayesian computation [36] or neural posterior estimation [37], as surveyed in [21].
Recent work applies these techniques directly to digital twins, using neural posterior
estimation for amortized parameter inference in physiological digital twins [38] and
formulating probabilistic digital twins through measure-theoretic constructions [39].
These approaches target posterior estimation over parameters. We instead learn a
generative policy that constructs complete simulator configurations, preserving the
compositional structure of the mechanistic model. Generative Flow Networks provide the formal basis for reward-proportional sampling of compositional objects, with
mode-covering behavior that distinguishes them from reward-maximizing reinforcement learning and mode-seeking variational inference, and have been surveyed as
tools for scientific discovery [40]. Established applications include Bayesian structure
learning [18] and multi-objective optimization [17], with training stabilized through
trajectory balance [23]. To our knowledge, prior work has not applied GFlowNets to
mechanistic simulator adaptation within a digital twin setting.
7 Conclusion
This work investigates model adaptation as a service within the lifecycle of digital twins
of natural systems, with generative modeling as an inference mechanism. The objective
was not simply to recalibrate a mechanistic simulator, but to maintain its operational
usefulness as new evidence becomes available. To that end, the adaptation service was
framed around two requirements:R1, the ability to retrieve parameterizations that
remain well aligned with the available observations, andR2, the ability to preserve
several plausible high-quality parameterizations rather than collapse prematurely onto
33
