title: Generative Flow Networks for Model Adaptation in Digital Twins of Natural Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: generative-flow-networks-for-model-adaptation-in-digital-twins-of-natural-systems
authors: Pascal Archambault; Houari Sahraoui; Eugene Syriani
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 76
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20707v1

h the available observations, andR2, the ability to preserve
several plausible high-quality parameterizations rather than collapse prematurely onto
33

a single solution. These requirements are especially important in natural systems,
where observations are sparse, noisy, and often insufficient to identify one unambiguous
explanation of the physical process.
Our results show that this objective is attainable when the parameterization is
characterized by a small state space. The learned model policy recovered the dominant
structure of the adaptation landscape, remained closely aligned with the exact target
distribution, and retrieved parameterizations whose simulated trajectories matched
the observations. In that setting, the method provided strong support for bothR1and
R2: it remained grounded enough to recover observation-aligned configurations while
also preserving several plausible alternatives that can support downstream digital twin
services.
Results on a larger parameter state-space showed that achieving better performance is limited by computational costs. Under a matched retrieval budget, the
GFlowNet remained competitive and continued to preserve a broader spread of plausible candidates than baselines. However, the enlarged search space made amortization
substantially more difficult, and simulator evaluation emerged as the dominant bottleneck. The main limitation identified by this study is thus not conceptual, but
computational.
Taken together, our results suggest that GFlowNets are a promising foundation
for model adaptation in digital twins of natural systems. They support both retrieval
of observation-aligned parameterizations and preservation of plausible alternatives,
which is precisely the combination required in underdetermined natural-system settings. Future work should therefore focus on improving scalability through more
efficient simulator use.
References
[1] Zhou, J., Zhang, S. & Gu, M. Revisiting digital twins: Origins, fundamentals,
and practices.Frontiers of Engineering Management9, 668–676 (2022).
[2] Javaid, M., Haleem, A. & Suman, R. Digital twin applications toward industry
4.0: A review.Cognitive Robotics3, 71–92 (2023).
[3] David, I.et al.Digital twins for cyber-biophysical systems: Challenges and
lessons learned. 2023 ACM/IEEE 26th International Conference on Model Driven
Engineering Languages and Systems (MODELS) (2023). Pp. 1–12. IEEE. doi:
10.1109/MODELS58315.2023.00014.
[4] Katsoulakis, E.et al.Digital twins for health: a scoping review.NPJ digital
medicine7, 77 (2024).
[5] Lin, L., Bao, H. & Dinh, N. Uncertainty quantification and software risk analysis
for digital twins in the nearly autonomous management and control systems: A
review.Annals of Nuclear Energy160, 108362 (2021).
34
