title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 6
section: object-oriented-features
chunk: 134
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

, but you should not be able to make a square this way.) Instead, both Square and Rectangle should be derived from some common abstract type, such as:

==== rationale ====
The behavior of a nonabstract operation can be interpreted as the expected behavior for all members of the class; therefore, the behavior must be a meaningful default for all descendants. If the operation must be tailored based on the descendant abstraction (e.g., computing the area of a geometric shape depends on the specific shape), then the operation should be primitive and possibly abstract. The effect of making the operation abstract is that it guarantees that each descendant must define its own version of the operation. Thus, when there is no acceptable basic behavior, an abstract operation is appropriate because a new version of the operation must be provided with each derivation.
All operations declared in the same package as the tagged type and following the tagged type's declaration but before the next type declaration are considered its primitive operations. Therefore, when a new type is derived from the tagged type, it inherits the primitive operations. If there are any operations that you do not want to be inherited, you must choose whether to declare them as class-wide operations (see Guideline 9.3.2) or to declare them in a separate package (e.g., a child package).
Exceptions are part of the semantics of the class. By modifying the exceptions, you are violating the semantic properties of the class-wide type (see Guideline 9.2.1).
There are (at least) two distinct users of a tagged type and its primitives. The "ordinary" user uses the type and its primitives without enhancement. The "extending" user extends the type by deriving a type based on the existing (tagged) type. Extending users and maintainers must determine the ramifications of a possibly incorrect extension. The guidelines here try to strike a balance between too much documentation (that can then easily get out of synch with the actual code) and an appropriate level of documentation to enhance the maintainability of the code.
One of the major maintenance headaches associated with inheritance and dynamic binding relates to undocumented interdependencies among primitive (dispatching) operations of tagged types (the equivalent of "methods" in typical object-oriented terminology). If a derived type inherits some and overrides other primitive operations, there is the question of what indirect effects on the inherited primitives are produced. If no redispatching is used, the primitives may be inherited as "black boxes." If redispatching is used internally, then when inherited, the externally visible behavior of an operation may change, depending on what other primitives are overridden. Maintenance problems (here, finding and fixing bugs) occur when someone overrides incorrectly (on purpose or by accident) an operation used in redispatching. Because this overriding can invalidate the functioning of another operation defined perhaps several levels of inheritance up from the incorrect operation, it can be extremely difficult to track down.
In the object-oriented paradigm, redispatching is often used to parameterize abstractions. In other words, certain primitives are intended to be overridden precisely because they are redispatching. These primitives may even be declared as abstract, requiring that they be overridden. Because they are redispatching, they act as "parameters" for the other operations. Although in Ada much of this parameterization can be done using generics, there are cases where the redispatching approach leads to a clearer object-oriented design. When you document the redispatching connection between the operations that are to be overridden and the operations that use them, you make the intended use of the type much clearer.
Hence, any use of redispatching within a primitive should be considered part of the "interface" of the primitive, at least as far as any inheritor, and requires documentation at the specification level. The alternative (i.e., not providing such documentation in the specification) is to have to delve deep into the code of all the classes in the derivation hierarchy in order to map out the redispatching calls. Such detective work compromises the black-box nature of object-oriented class definitions. Note that if you follow Guideline 9.2.1 on preserving the semantics of the class-wide dispatching operations in the extensions of derived types, you will minimize or avoid the problems discussed here about redispatching.
