title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 6
section: object-oriented-features
chunk: 150
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

hen a type is composed of several others types, you should use heterogeneous data structuring techniques, discussed in Guideline 5.4.2.

== Summary ==

=== tagged type hierarchies ===
Consider using type extension when designing an is-a (generalization/specialization) hierarchy.
Use tagged types to preserve a common interface across differing implementations (Taft 1995a).
When defining a tagged type in a package, consider including a definition of a general access type to the corresponding class-wide type.
In general, define only one tagged type per package.
The implementation of the dispatching operations of each type in a derivation class rooted in a tagged type T should conform to the expected semantics of the corresponding dispatching operations of the class-wide type T'Class.
Consider using a controlled type whenever a type allocates resources that must be deallocated or otherwise "cleaned up" on destruction or overwriting.
Use a derivation from a controlled type in preference to providing an explicit "cleanup" operation that must be called by clients of the type.
When overriding the adjustment and finalization procedures derived from controlled types, define the finalization procedure to undo the effects of the adjustment procedure.
Derived type initialization procedures should call the initialization procedure of their parent as part of their type-specific initialization.
Derived type finalization procedures should call the finalization procedure of their parent as part of their type-specific finalization.
Consider deriving a data structure's components rather than the enclosing data structure from a controlled type.
Consider using abstract types and operations in creating classification schemes, for example, a taxonomy, in which only the leaf objects will be meaningful in the application.
Consider declaring root types and internal nodes in a type tree as abstract.
Consider using abstract types for generic formal derived types.
Consider using abstract types to develop different implementations of a single abstraction.
