title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 6
section: object-oriented-features
chunk: 151
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

der using abstract types for generic formal derived types.
Consider using abstract types to develop different implementations of a single abstraction.

=== tagged type operations ===
Consider declaring a primitive abstract operation based on the absence of a meaningful "default" behavior.
Consider declaring a primitive nonabstract operation based on the presence of a meaningful "default" behavior.
When overriding an operation, the overriding subprogram should not raise exceptions that are not known to the users of the overridden subprogram.
If redispatching is used in the implementation of the operations of a type, with the specific intent that some of the redispatched-to operations be overridden by specializations for the derived types, then document this intent clearly in the specification as part of the "interface" of a parent type with its derived types.
When redispatching is used (for any reason) in the implementation of a primitive operation of a tagged type, then document (in some project-consistent way) this use in the body of the operation subprogram so that it can be easily found during maintenance.
Consider using a class-wide operation (i.e., an operation with parameter[s] of a class-wide type) when an operation can be written, compiled, and tested without knowing all the possible descendants of a given tagged type (Barnes 1996).
Consider using a class-wide operation when you do not want an operation to be inherited and/or overridden.
Avoid declaring a constructor as a primitive abstract operation.
Use a primitive abstract operation to declare an initialization function or constructor only when objects of the inheriting derived types will not require additional parameters for initialization.
Consider using access discriminants to provide parameters to default initialization.
Use constructors for explicit initialization.
Consider splitting the initialization and construction of an object.
Consider declaring a constructor operation in a child package.
Consider declaring a constructor operation to return an access value to the constructed object (Dewar 1995).
When you redefine the "=" operator on a tagged type, make sure that it has the expected behavior in extensions of this type and override it if necessary.
Consider using class-wide programming to provide run-time, dynamic polymorphism when constructing larger, reusable, extensible frameworks.
When possible, use class-wide programming rather than variant records.
Use class-wide programming to provide a consistent interface across the set of types in the tagged type hierarchy (i.e., class).
Consider using generics to define a new type in terms of an existing type, either as an extension or as a container, collection, or composite data structure.
Avoid using type extensions for parameterized abstractions when generics provide a more appropriate mechanism.
