title: On the Impact of Face Segmentation-Based Background Removal on Recognition and Morphing Attack Detection
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: on-the-impact-of-face-segmentation-based-background-removal-on-recognition-and-morphing-attack-detection
authors: Eduarda Caldeira; Guray Ozgur; Fadi Boutros; Naser Damer
page: 16
section: segmentationmethodsevaluation
chunk: 54
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20585v1

in genuine/impostor distributions’ overlap between
segmentation methods directly translate to the performance discrepancies verified in FR evaluation.

Fig. 9. Joint visualization of the metrics evaluated for IJB-C and its segmented variants in the main paper, namely TAR@FAR=1e-4,∆, the FIQA metric
(top block), and BPCER@t10% for the three evaluated MAD methods (bottom block).
However, it is important to keep in mind that metrics
such as the recall andmIoUhide segmentation failures
when a significant portion of the background is considered as
belonging to the object. This is particularly true for recall,
butmIoUis also associated with this phenomenon when
the object occupies a significant portion of the image (FP is
bounded to a low value if TP is high), as happens on the
CelebAMask-HQ dataset (Figure 10). This poor segmentation will also be hidden when evaluating the FR performance
on the segmented samples, as inappropriate background
removal approximates the samples to their original unsegmented versions. Hence, we also report the precision, which
measures the accuracy of positive predictions, that is, how
many predicted positives are actual positives:
P recision= T P
T P+F P .(3)
C. Results
Table V shows the segmentation evaluation results of the
seven methods used for background removal in this work.
While most methods achieve values ofmIoU, precision,
and recall above 90%, BiSeNetv2 and Fast SCNN achieve
significantly lowermIoUand recall values than the remaining methods, suggesting that they possess a lower capacity
to correctly identify the desired object. This tendency can
be visually confirmed in Figure 10, where it is shown that
these networks struggle to correctly segment some samples.
However, it should be kept in mind that these results are not
directly translatable to what is verified with other datasets,
namely those considered in the main paper, due to their
significantly different characteristics. In particular, it should
be noted that the images contained in CelebAMask-HQ
are high-quality samples that do not possess significant
background noise, as the face occupies most of the sample.
While these results do not directly translate to the tendencies
observed in the main paper, there is no other face seg-
