title: Storm Surge Modeling, Bias Correction, Graph Neural Networks, Graph Convolution Networks
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: storm-surge-modeling-bias-correction-graph-neural-networks-graph-convolution-networks
authors: Noujoud Nader; Stefanos Giaremis; Clint Dawson; Carola Kaiser; Karame Mohammadiporshokooh; Hartmut Kaiser
page: 2
section: r-e-s-u-lt-s
chunk: 6
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20688v1

apid intensity changes and the complexity of the multiscale underlying processes,
pose a significant challenge for predicting TC intensity [ 21–23].
6

From the above, it is evident that the intensification of TC-related events requires
augmented efforts towards the development and improvement of operational forecasting frameworks and early warning systems for hazard mitigation, emergency planning,
and quantifying the impacts of extreme weather events on coastal communities. Storm
surge models, based on numerical solutions of hydrodynamic equations and forced
by meteorological inputs, constitute the cornerstone of such frameworks [ 24–26]. The
advanced circulation model for oceanic, coastal and estuarine waters (ADCIRC) [ 27]
is among the most broadly used storm surge models, and it is employed by U.S. federal agencies, academic institutions, and private organizations for both research and
operational purposes. It is commonly used in tight coupling with SW AN, a thirdgeneration spectral wave model, with the two models sharing the same triangular mesh
and exchanging water depth, current, and wave radiation stress information [ 28, 29].
The Coastal Emergency Risk Assessment (CERA) framework is an interactive online
visualization platform that combines real-time water level measurements with numerical predictions based on ADCIRC [ 30]. It is designed to provide first responders,
decision-makers, and the general public with critical insights during hurricanes and
other extreme weather events. The aforementioned intensification of extreme weather
events has motivated numerous and continuous developments in storm surge prediction and response frameworks such as the above, for instance in terms of improving
mesh design, computational eﬀiciency and descriptions of natural processes, facilitating model comparisons, enabling the coupling of multiscale approaches, using storm
surge model data for traﬀic and risk assessment, and others [ 24, 31–41].
Nevertheless, inherent uncertainties remain inevitable in storm surge models.
These primarily arise from errors in the specification of hurricane characteristics,
such as track, wind speed, and size, and inaccuracies in input data, including
coastal topography, bathymetry, and land cover representation. Additional sources of
bias include inaccuracies in atmospheric forcing from parent meteorological models,
7
