title: Storm Surge Modeling, Bias Correction, Graph Neural Networks, Graph Convolution Networks
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: storm-surge-modeling-bias-correction-graph-neural-networks-graph-convolution-networks
authors: Noujoud Nader; Stefanos Giaremis; Clint Dawson; Carola Kaiser; Karame Mohammadiporshokooh; Hartmut Kaiser
page: 2
section: r-e-s-u-lt-s
chunk: 9
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20688v1

ting [ 88]. While a similar approach has been also reported for
bias correcting numerical forecasts in the same context [ 89], the implementation of
9

this family of methods for bias correcting storm-specific scenarios has not been yet
widely explored. Thus, in this work, we demonstrate the performance of StormNet, a
GNN-based approach for bias correcting storm surge forecasts. We employ our model
for bias correcting ADCIRC-based predictions during storm events in the U.S. Gulf
Coast and we compare the results with our previous LSTM-based model [ 77].
Contributions.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
• We propose StormNet, a spatio-temporal graph neural network architecture that
integrates GCN, GAT, and LSTM components to jointly capture spatial correlations
and temporal dynamics for storm surge bias correction.
• We introduce a physically informed graph construction strategy that leverages interstation correlations and coastal geometry to encode meaningful spatial relationships
between gauge locations, enabling better spatio-temporal learning.
• We develop an end-to-end forecasting framework that predicts future model biases
and applies them to correct ADCIRC water-level forecasts. This hybrid physics–
ML approach leads to accuracy improvements, especially for longer (48–72 hour)
prediction horizons.
• We conduct a comprehensive evaluation using real hurricane events from the U.S.
Gulf Coast, including an independent test on Hurricane Idalia (2023).
• We perform an ablation analysis to quantify the contribution of each architectural
component (GCN, GAT, LSTM) and demonstrate the robustness of the model, low
training cost, and suitability for a real-time operational forecasting system (CERA).
The paper is organized as follows: Data acquisition, preprocessing, and GNN model
architecture, along with its underlying principles, are presented in Section 2. The
results of applying StormNet in the considered region of interest, along with a comparison with the LSTM-based model of [ 77], and the results of the ablation study
10
