title: Storm Surge Modeling, Bias Correction, Graph Neural Networks, Graph Convolution Networks
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: storm-surge-modeling-bias-correction-graph-neural-networks-graph-convolution-networks
authors: Noujoud Nader; Stefanos Giaremis; Clint Dawson; Carola Kaiser; Karame Mohammadiporshokooh; Hartmut Kaiser
page: 2
section: r-e-s-u-lt-s
chunk: 10
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20688v1

ng StormNet in the considered region of interest, along with a comparison with the LSTM-based model of [ 77], and the results of the ablation study
10

are shown in Section 3. Finally, the concluding remarks and the limitations of this
approach are included in Section 4.
2 Methodology
2.1 Overview
The proposed pipeline integrates spatial and temporal learning components to correct
biases in physics-based hurricane storm surge predictions, as illustrated in Figure 1. It
comprises three key steps, namely data preprocessing, graph computation, and offset
prediction. The first stage (Figure 1.A) involves the systematic extraction of the offsets
(Eq. 1) between the modeled and observed water level time series from each gauge
station in the available dataset. The offset time series ( oi) for each gauge station i is
defined as follows:
oi(t) = xmodeled
i (t) − xi(t) (1)
where xmodeled
i (t) and xi(t) denote the forecast (via ADCIRC) and observed (from
gauge stations) water levels, respectively, and oi(t) is the water level offset (i.e., the
bias), at each timestep t for each station i. More details on this phase are explained in
Section 2.2. Given the graph-like nature of our problem, the data can be reformulated
as a graph (Stage 2, Figure 1.B). A graph G is an abstract representation of a network,
consisting of a set of nodes V and edges E that indicate the presence of interactions
between nodes [ 90–92]. In our formulation, each node vi ∈ V corresponds to a gauge
station and each edge (vi, vj) ∈ E represents the correlation between stations i and j.
Further details about this stage are described in Section 2.3. Finally, in the third stage,
we employ the proposed StormNet model to forecast offsets (biases) at all stations.
These predicted offsets are then used to correct the physics-based (ADCIRC) modeled
water levels, thereby improving the accuracy and reliability of storm surge forecasts
within CERA platform.
11
