title: Storm Surge Modeling, Bias Correction, Graph Neural Networks, Graph Convolution Networks
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: storm-surge-modeling-bias-correction-graph-neural-networks-graph-convolution-networks
authors: Noujoud Nader; Stefanos Giaremis; Clint Dawson; Carola Kaiser; Karame Mohammadiporshokooh; Hartmut Kaiser
page: 2
section: r-e-s-u-lt-s
chunk: 11
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20688v1

rect the physics-based (ADCIRC) modeled
water levels, thereby improving the accuracy and reliability of storm surge forecasts
within CERA platform.
11

CERA Platform
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
Time (mins.)
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Water level (ft.)
Springmaid Pier, SC (8661070, NOAA-NOS)
Observed
Modeled
Offset
A. Signal Processing
Nodes (Stations)
V = {•, •, •, •, •}
Edges
(Functional Dependencies)
• Compute pairwise correlation ρij from
observed water level.
• Keep edges if ρij > ρ min and dij < d max.
Et = {(vi, vj) | ρij > ρ min, d ij < d max}
B. Graph Computation
StormNet
G = ⟨X, E, V ⟩
Input Output
Time
t1 t
C. Offset Prediction
Fig. 1 : Overview of the proposed spatio-temporal learning pipeline for bias correction in hurricane storm surge forecasting StormNet. (A) Data preprocessing: include
computation of offsets between modeled and observed water levels at each gauge station. (B) Graph computation: construction of the spatio-temporal graph G = ( V, E),
where nodes represent stations and edges represent correlations betweeen stations. (C)
Offset prediction: the proposed StormNet model forecasts future offsets ˆoi(t), which
are subsequently used to correct the physics-based (ADCIRC) modeled water levels.
2.2 Data Acquisition and Preprocessing
Observed and modeled water elevation time series data at an hourly resolution from 13
historical U.S. hurricanes (Table 1) are extracted from the Historical Storm Archive by
CERA [56, 61] and visualized with the online interactive CERA framework [ 30]. Gauge
station data from NOAA, U.S. Geological Survey, Texas Coastal Ocean Observation
Network and other U.S. agencies were used as observed values, while modeled water
elevation for each gauge station location was produced by ADCIRC [ 27]. The offset
timeseries (Eq. 1) is calculated by the difference between the modeled values from their
observed counterparts at each time interval for each station and TC. Offset values
outside the range of three standard deviations (calculated on the whole dataset) were
eliminated.
Our study focuses on the Gulf Coast of the U.S., due to its high susceptibility to
hurricane events; therefore, only data from gauge stations in this region are included.
12
