title: Storm Surge Modeling, Bias Correction, Graph Neural Networks, Graph Convolution Networks
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: storm-surge-modeling-bias-correction-graph-neural-networks-graph-convolution-networks
authors: Noujoud Nader; Stefanos Giaremis; Clint Dawson; Carola Kaiser; Karame Mohammadiporshokooh; Hartmut Kaiser
page: 2
section: r-e-s-u-lt-s
chunk: 12
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20688v1

e Gulf Coast of the U.S., due to its high susceptibility to
hurricane events; therefore, only data from gauge stations in this region are included.
12

Furthermore, as explained in more detail in the following sections, offset time series
for all the considered stations are treated in parallel by the ML model. Thus, it is
necessary to construct a single time series for each station by concatenating the data
for all the considered hurricanes. The resulting time series for all stations must also
have the same length. As a result, stations with a large amount of missing data for
at least one of the considered storms are excluded from the dataset. This procedure
leads to the selection of 16 gauge stations, listed in Table 3. Out of the 13 total TCs,
data for Hurricanes Ian (2022) and Idalia (2023) are separated from the full dataset
and used as validation and test sets, respectively, while the remaining TC data constitute the training set. All sets were further divided into windows using the windowing
technique, a common method in time series forecasting. This technique converts continuous time series data into a supervised learning problem by creating input-output
pairs. It involves defining a fixed-size window that slides through the data, forming
input sequences from a set of consecutive past values (”input window”), and their
corresponding target values (”prediction window”). This approach is effective for capturing temporal patterns and dependencies in the data, making it a useful strategy for
time series forecasting [ 77, 78]. To address the issue of disparate data scales, data are
transformed using the MinMax scaler of the Scikit-Learn Python package [ 93]. Training, validation, and test sets are rescaled separately, based on the attributes of the
training set, to avoid data leakage [ 94].
2.3 Graph-Based Representation of Gauge Stations
To capture the spatial dependencies among water‐level gauge stations, we model the
entire network of stations as an undirected graph. A graph ( G) is an abstract representation of a network, consisting of a set of nodes ( V) and edges ( E), indicating the
presence of an interaction between nodes [ 90–92]. For our problem, we present the
13
