title: Storm Surge Modeling, Bias Correction, Graph Neural Networks, Graph Convolution Networks
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: storm-surge-modeling-bias-correction-graph-neural-networks-graph-convolution-networks
authors: Noujoud Nader; Stefanos Giaremis; Clint Dawson; Carola Kaiser; Karame Mohammadiporshokooh; Hartmut Kaiser
page: 2
section: r-e-s-u-lt-s
chunk: 15
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20688v1

jacency matrix
Data Related xi Observed water-level signal at gauge station i
xmodeled
i Modeled water-level (via ADCIRC) signal at gauge station i
15

2.4 Graph neural network
Our proposed model integrates GCN and Graph Attention Networks (GAT) to capture
both global topological dependencies and adaptive local feature importance within
the graph. The overall architecture is described in detail in Section 2.5.
2.4.1 Graph Convolution Network (GCN)
The GCN layer aggregates feature information from a node’s local neighborhood
through a normalized summation. It captures global structural information eﬀiciently
through a spectral-based convolution. It can be presented as follows:
hl+1
i = σ
0
@ X
j∈N (i)
1
cij
ϕlhl
j
1
A , (2)
where N (i) denotes the set of nodes directly connected to node i, σ is the activation
function.
2.4.2 Graph Attention Network (GAT)
Following a self-attention strategy [ 96], GAT learns the hidden features of each node
by iteratively using node features to compute similarities. The GAT layer extends
GCNs by applying an attention mechanism that learns to assign different weights to
neighboring nodes, allowing the model to focus on more relevant features.
At this stage, each node i is represented by a feature vector hl
i ∈ RF , all node
features can be expressed as hl = {hl
1, hl
2, . . . , hl
N }, where N and F denote the total
number of nodes and features, respectively. To project these input features into a
higher-dimensional latent space, a shared linear transformation is applied using the
weight matrix W ∈ RF ′×F . The transformed features are then used to compute
pairwise attention scores between the connected nodes. The attention coeﬀicient eij
between the nodes i and j is obtained as:
16
