title: Storm Surge Modeling, Bias Correction, Graph Neural Networks, Graph Convolution Networks
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: storm-surge-modeling-bias-correction-graph-neural-networks-graph-convolution-networks
authors: Noujoud Nader; Stefanos Giaremis; Clint Dawson; Carola Kaiser; Karame Mohammadiporshokooh; Hartmut Kaiser
page: 2
section: r-e-s-u-lt-s
chunk: 20
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20688v1

f 42 to 48 hours (see Supplementary Information, Table 1). Training and
inference were performed on a single NVIDIA A100 graphical processing unit.
19

We use Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), Mean Squared Error (MSE), and Mean
Absolute Error (MAE) to evaluate the performance of the model, which are defined
as follows:
RMSE =
vuut 1
n
nX
i=1
(oi − ˆoi)2 (8)
MSE = 1
n
nX
i=1
(oi − ˆoi)2 (9)
MAE = 1
n
nX
i=1
|oi − ˆoi| (10)
where oi denotes the true offset at time i, and ˆoi denotes the predicted offset at
time i.
3 Results and Discussion
Applying the data processing steps explained in Section 2.2 led to the selection of
16 gauge stations in the region of interest (the Gulf Coast region of the southern
U.S.) that contained both observed and forecast water level data for all of the considered storms in Table 1. Subsequently, implementing the methodology explained in
Section 2.3 for constructing a graph model of these 16 gauge stations, with correlation and radius thresholds, ρmin and dmax, set to 0.8 and 500 km, respectively, leads
to the graph shown in Figure 4, with the gauge stations corresponding to each node
listed in Table 3. Node connectivity was calculated based on the Pearson correlation
coeﬀicient between water level observations at each node for all the hurricanes in the
training set (see Section 2.3). The values chosen for ρmin and dmax represent the lowest
limits that avoid disconnected stations while also ensuring that connections for each
station are made within a reasonable geographic proximity. Node no. 8 (Grand Isle,
LA, 8761724, NOAA-NOS) has the highest number of connections (i.e., 9). On the
other hand, even the least connected nodes have no fewer than four connections. This
20
