title: Storm Surge Modeling, Bias Correction, Graph Neural Networks, Graph Convolution Networks
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: storm-surge-modeling-bias-correction-graph-neural-networks-graph-convolution-networks
authors: Noujoud Nader; Stefanos Giaremis; Clint Dawson; Carola Kaiser; Karame Mohammadiporshokooh; Hartmut Kaiser
page: 3
section: tcoon
chunk: 32
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20688v1

e National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration [ 100], and established by the National Weather Service local Weather Forecast
Oﬀices (see [ 50])
28

3.2 Comparison with Sequential LSTM-based Model
Predictions
The novelty of StormNet lies in its use of a GNN, with a graph representation of nodes
constructed based on the correlation of their water level observations (see Section 2.3),
in conjunction with LSTM layers, forming a spatiotemporal predictive framework. In
this section, the performance of this approach is compared with the results of the
LSTM-based model of [ 77], in which interactions between data from different stations
were not explicitly modeled in the architecture.
In Figure 8 and Table 4, we compare the results of StormNet and the LSTMbased model of [ 77] in bias-correcting water level forecasts in the gauge stations we
have considered (Figures 7 and Table 3). We also examined the accuracy of both
models for both the full duration of the water level time series and a shorter span
of two days around landfall, to further assess their performance specifically during
the most intense storm conditions. In Figure 8, the results of the model with the
lowest RMSE are presented for each station (with purple denoting StormNet and
orange the LSTM model of [ 77]). Each station is represented only by the model that
yields the lowest RMSE among the two. For applying 24 h-ahead corrections, both
models yield quite similar accuracy. For corrections throughout the full timeseries,
each model outperforms the other in 8 of the stations, with the LSTM-based model
of [ 77] even yielding slightly lower average RMSE across all stations, compared to
StormNet. StormNet corrections show slightly better accuracy for the two-day period
around landfall, as applying StormNet leads to a lower RMSE for 9 of the 16 stations,
with only a small improvement to the average RMSE. The picture is clearer for the
36 h-ahead corrections, as StormNet outperforms the LSTM-based model of [ 77] in
11 of 16 stations in the full time series case, and in 13 of 16 stations in the case of the
two-day period around landfall, showing approximately 11% and 12% lower average
RMSE throughout all stations in each case, respectively.
29
