title: Storm Surge Modeling, Bias Correction, Graph Neural Networks, Graph Convolution Networks
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: storm-surge-modeling-bias-correction-graph-neural-networks-graph-convolution-networks
authors: Noujoud Nader; Stefanos Giaremis; Clint Dawson; Carola Kaiser; Karame Mohammadiporshokooh; Hartmut Kaiser
page: 3
section: tcoon
chunk: 37
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20688v1

redicting 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 24, 36, 48, and 72 h-ahead biases in
ADCIRC water level forecasts at 16 gauge stations along the U.S. Gulf Coast region
33

during Hurricane Idalia (2023). The model is trained on water level bias data from
these stations from 11 historical hurricanes (see Table 1), with all data obtained from
the Coastal Emergency Risk Assessement Historical Storm Archive [ 56, 61].
Overall, the model is found to consistently yield low RMSE values even at increased
prediction windows, with the median RMSE saturating to 0.9 m with prediction
window increasing up to 72 h, corresponding to an improvement of more than 50%
compared to the non-corrected water level predictions. The physics-based graph representation enables the model to adequately capture biases in gauge stations located at
both severely storm-impacted and unaffected regions. An ablation analysis assessing
architectures composed of different component subsets demonstrates the optimality
of the design choices adopted for StormNet. Furthermore, the model is shown to yield
similar accuracy compared to the previous LSTM-based bias prediction method of [ 77]
for short prediction windows and the considered gauge stations, but lower RMSE by
10% for prediction windows greater than 24 h. However, it requires shorter training
times in all cases, making it promising for operational purposes.
Note that this approach can only be used to perform bias correction on coordinates
with both observed and numerically predicted data available, and further requires
comparable amounts of training data to be available for each of the considered locations. Moreover, physical insight is incorporated in the model via the construction
of the graph representation, but not on the learning process. Therefore, future work
is intended for developing approaches for assessing biases in ungauged locations in a
physically meaningful manner.
StormNet can be used as a post-processing bias correction module for gauged locations in real-time operational forecasting systems, due to its consistent performance
at increased prediction windows and its low inference time. Its ability to consistently
alleviate systematic biases in storm conditions can improve the implementation of
warning, prevention, and evacuation strategies during such critical conditions.
34
