title: Variance Is Not Importance: Structural Analysis of Transformer Compressibility Across Model Scales
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: variance-is-not-importance-structural-analysis-of-transformer-compressibility-across-model-scales
authors: Samuel Salfati
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 21
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20682v1

g (exit at the earliest block where softmax confidence
exceeds a threshold) yields compute savings of 6.4–26.9%, but at significant perplexity cost
11

Figure 8: Four-phase functional architecture of GPT-2, revealed by component-level destruction
(INT2 quantization). Phase I: context building (attention-dominated). Phase II: feature construction (MLP-dominated). Phase III: refinement (both light). Phase IV: prediction assembly
(attention-dominated).
(+4.31 to +35.75). The quality-speed tradeoff is poor with post-hoc trained heads, as high
softmax confidence does not reliably indicate prediction correctness on held-out data.
LoRA fine-tuning (rank 64, dual lossL=L final + 0.5· L early, 500 steps on 32 samples)
improved agreement by only +0.2% in this data-limited setting. Scaling to proper fine-tuning
conditions (10K steps, 866K tokens, three models including Mistral 7B, Llama 3.2 3B, and
TinyLlama 1.1B) raises agreement to 35–53%. Cross-entropy supervision consistently outperforms KL distillation for exit head training, suggesting that top-token fidelity, not distribution
matching, is the correct optimization target for early exit systems.
5.5 Rotation-Based Quantization Fails Similarly
We additionally test whether rotating into an activation-informed basis (PCA or CCA) followed
by mixed-precision quantization (INT8 on important rows, INT2 on unimportant rows) can
circumvent the reconstruction wall. Despite CCA providing 23% better predictionR2 than PCA
(Section 4.1), both rotated mixed-precision schemes produce 20–21×worse MSE than direct
INT4 at the same 4-bit budget. The reconstruction wall applies regardless of basis choice. This
is consistent with the basis ablation in [16], which shows<0.4 PPL spread across four different
bases under direct quantization: the advantage of quantization over rank reduction comes from
preserving all dimensions, not from choosing a better coordinate system.
6 Practical Implications
We summarize the actionable guidance that follows from each structural finding:
The overarching message is thatcompression should respect the geometry of the computation,
not the geometry of the representation. Methods that operate uniformly on all directions (quan12
