title: Variance Is Not Importance: Structural Analysis of Transformer Compressibility Across Model Scales
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: variance-is-not-importance-structural-analysis-of-transformer-compressibility-across-model-scales
authors: Samuel Salfati
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 22
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20682v1

ssion should respect the geometry of the computation,
not the geometry of the representation. Methods that operate uniformly on all directions (quan12

Figure 9: Early exit head agreement with full model on Mistral 7B. Naive heads (untrained)
achieve poor agreement, while trained heads (500 steps) show substantial improvement—
demonstrating that prediction-relevant information is present at intermediate depths but encoded differently than the final head expects.
tization) outperform methods that selectively discard directions (rank reduction), because the
directions that appear dispensable by energy-based criteria are often computationally critical.
7 Discussion
7.1 Why Static Compression Is Hard
Our experiments reveal a fundamental tension: the structural properties that make individual blocks compressible (approximate linearity, concentrated variance) do not compose across
blocks. The residual connection architecture preserves all errors additively, while each approximation shifts the activation distribution for downstream computation. This is not a failure of
any particular compression method—it is a structural property of the residual stream itself.
The practical ceiling is set by direct quantization methods (GPTQ, AWQ), which sidestep
the composition problem by operating uniformly on all directions within each layer. The “free
lunch” of exploiting structural redundancy appears limited to single blocks (3% of the model)
or marginal quantization improvements (NF4’s 1.2×better MSE). Our companion paper [16]
confirms this empirically across five models: quantization outperforms rank reduction by 4–364
PPL at matched storage budgets.
7.2 The Promise of Adaptive Computation
The 30% easy-token finding suggests a different path: rather than compressing the model
statically, allocate computation dynamically per token. Easy tokens (30%) could exit early at
13
