title: Variance Is Not Importance: Structural Analysis of Transformer Compressibility Across Model Scales
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: variance-is-not-importance-structural-analysis-of-transformer-compressibility-across-model-scales
authors: Samuel Salfati
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 24
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20682v1

old we recommend for
perplexity evaluation in deployment contexts. (4) We do not test models larger than 7B, where
compression behavior may differ.
14

Figure 10: Summary of five structural findings and their implications for transformer compression. Each finding maps to a specific failure mode of existing compression methods and suggests
an alternative approach.
8 Conclusion
Through over 40 systematic experiments across two model scales, we establish five structural
properties of transformer compressibility. Our central finding is thatvariance is not importance:
the standard tools for identifying redundancy (PCA, activation magnitude, output variance)
are poor proxies for computational importance. Direct quantization methods avoid this issue
by operating uniformly on all directions, while more sophisticated approaches that attempt
to exploit structural redundancy consistently fall into the reconstruction wall or composition
failure.
We additionally identify a clear four-phase functional architecture (context building→feature construction→refinement→prediction assembly) that suggests compression strategies
should be phase-aware rather than uniform across depth.
The most promising direction for inference cost reduction is not static compression but
adaptive computation: dynamically allocating depth and precision per token based on prediction
confidence. The 30% easy-token finding quantifies the opportunity, while the linearity gradient
(R2: 0.17→0.93) identifies which blocks are safe to bypass. Realizing this potential requires
integration with model training, as demonstrated by the scaled LoRA fine-tuning results in
Section 5.4.
Code and Data Availability
All experiment scripts, calibration data splits, and raw perplexity / CCA / R 2 outputs underlying the tables and figures in this paper are available upon request from the corresponding
author. A public release accompanying the companion paper [16] is planned.
15
