title: Occupancy Reward Shaping: Improving Credit Assignment for Offline Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: occupancy-reward-shaping-improving-credit-assignment-for-offline-goal-conditioned-reinforcement-learning
authors: Aravind Venugopal; Jiayu Chen; Xudong Wu; Chongyi Zheng; Benjamin Eysenbach; Jeff Schneider
page: 2
section: abstract
chunk: 20
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20627v1

ormation present in the dataset occupancy measure without having to estimate the new occupancy
measure at each intermediate policy improvement step.
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
4.4 METHODSUMMARY
ORS has 3 stages:1.Train the flow matching occupancy modeld πD
θ using Eq. 3;2.Train the reward
functionr W
ψ using Eq. 5; and3.Train a goal-conditioned policy using any offline GCRL algorithm
that uses a TD-learning critic. Stages 1 and 2 that involve learningd πD
θ andr W
ψ are summarized in
Alg. 1. Details on architecture and hyperparameters are provided in Appendix B.6.
5 EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we present an extensive empirical analysis of ORS across a variety of challenging
long-horizon offline GCRL tasks. We then conduct detailed analyses and ablations to dissect key
design choices underlying our algorithm.
Tasks:For our empirical analysis, we primarily use OGBench (Park et al., 2024a), a benchmark
specifically built for evaluating offline GCRL algorithms. We choose OGBench over older benchmarks such as Fu et al. (2020); Tarasov et al. (2023) for its task diversity, challenging long-horizon
sparse-reward tasks that are unsaturated as of 2025, and comprehensive multi-goal evaluation.
OGBench tasks are broadly categorized into 4 types: maze navigation, cube manipulation, puzzle
manipulation, and scene tasks. We select tasks with varying levels of task complexity and planning
horizon. from OGBench to be representative of these 4 categories. Within each category, we include
tasks of varying complexity (e.g., cube-double and cube-triple) and varying dataset quality (e.g.,
cube-triple-play and cube-triple-noisy). We provide a detailed explanation of tasks in Appendix B.1.
To demonstrate effectiveness in real-world settings, we evaluate ORS on actuator control tasks in a
nuclear fusion reactor called a Tokamak. We use raw sensor and actuator data collected from the
DIII-D tokamak located in San Diego, CA, USA. ORS controls 4 actuators that influence evolution
of plasma in the Tokamak, a system characterized by highly non-linear, stochastic dynamics and
complex physics. We evaluate over 3 separate tasks, each tracking a certain scalar or profile state
variable:β N (normalized ratio between plasma pressure and magnetic pressure), Electron density
and Ion rotation. These quantities critically influence plasma stability and overall power output
required for commercially viable nuclear fusion. Please refer to Appendix B.2 for further details.
Baselines:We compare ORS against a set of representative baselines. These include Goal Conditioned Behavioral Cloning (GCBC) (Ghosh et al., 2019); Goal-Conditioned Implicit Q Learning
(GCIQL) (Kostrikov et al., 2021) and Goal-Conditioned Implicit Value Learning (GCIVL) (Park
et al., 2023) which approximate value functions using expectile regression (Newey & Powell,
1987) and recover policies using behavior-constrained deterministic policy gradient (DDPG + BC)
and advantage-weighted regression (AWR), respectively (Park et al., 2024b). Quasimetric RL
(QRL) (Wang et al., 2023a) learns a specialized quasimetric goal-conditioned value function with a
dual objective. Contrastive RL (CRL) (Eysenbach et al., 2022) fits a Monte Carlo goal-conditioned
value function using contrastive learning and extracts a greedy policy from it.
We also compare ORS to several methods designed for long-horizon, sparse-reward settings.GoFresh(Mezghani et al., 2023) learns a shaped reward as a sum of a local reward from a temporal distance classifier between states and a global reward computed by shortest-path search on a
graph constructed with the local distance classifier.SMORE(Sikchi et al., 2023a) is an occupancymatching method that uses dual RL to learn unnormalized densities that reflect the distance to goal.
Hierarchical Implicit Q Learning (HIQL) (Park et al., 2023) trains a low-level policy to reach goals
sampled from a high-level policy, both trained via a single GCIVL-style value function. Subgoal
Advantage-Weighted Policy Bootstrapping (SA W) (Zhou & Kao, 2025) improves over HIQl by
training a non-hierarchical goal-conditioned policy by bootstrapping on subgoal-conditioned policies with advantage-weighted importance sampling.n-step GCIQLandGCIQL-OTAuse different
techniques to learn a GCIQL critic using n-step TD learning (De Asis et al., 2018; Ahn et al., 2025).
These baselines ensure a standalone comparison of our method against two key strategies to horizon
reduction in RL. Both ORS and Go-Fresh use GCIQL with a Gaussian policy, owing to its popularity and simplicity and to ensure fair comparison. We build on the codebase of OGBench and make
use of the official implementation for Go-Fresh. All algorithms use hindsight relabeling (Kaelbling,
7
