title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 10
section: programming-practices
chunk: 286
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

e range of Listing_Paper
when the line is empty. All the indices can be mixed in expressions,
as long as the results fall within the correct subtypes:

==== rationale ====
The name of a derived type can make clear its intended use and
avoid proliferation of similar type definitions. Objects of two
derived types, even though derived from the same type, cannot
be mixed in operations unless such operations are supplied explicitly
or one is converted to the other explicitly. This prohibition
is an enforcement of strong typing.
Define new types, derived types, and subtypes cautiously and deliberately.
The concepts of subtype and derived type are not equivalent, but
they can be used to advantage in concert. A subtype limits the
range of possible values for a type but does not define a new
type.
Types can have highly constrained sets of values without eliminating
useful values. Used in concert, derived types and subtypes can
eliminate many flag variables and type
conversions within executable statements. This renders the program
more readable, enforces the abstraction,
and allows the compiler to enforce strong typing constraints.
Many algorithms begin or end with values just outside the normal
range. If boundary values are not compatible within subexpressions,
algorithms can be needlessly complicated. The program can become
cluttered with flag variables and special cases when it could
just test for zero or some other sentinel
value just outside normal range.
The type Columns and the subtype Listing_Paper
in the example above demonstrate how to allow sentinel values.
The subtype Listing_Paper could be used as the type for
parameters of subprograms declared in the specification of a package.
This would restrict the range of values that could be specified
by the caller. Meanwhile, the type Columns could be used
to store such values internally to the body of the package, allowing
First_Column - 1 to be used as a sentinel value. This
combination of types and subtypes allows compatibility between
subtypes within subexpressions without type conversions as would
happen with derived types.
The choice between type derivation and type extension depends
on what kind of changes you expect to occur to objects in the
type. In general, type derivation is a very simple form of inheritance:
the derived types inherit the structure, operations, and values
of the parent type (Rationale 1995, §4.2 ). Although you can
add operations, you cannot augment the data structure. You can
derive from either scalar or composite types.
Type extension is a more powerful form of inheritance, only applied
to tagged records, in which you can augment both the
type's components and operations. When the record implements an
abstraction with the potential for reuse and/or extension, it
is a good candidate for making it tagged. Similarly,
if the abstraction is a member of a family of abstractions with
well-defined variable and common properties, you should consider
a tagged record.
