title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 10
section: programming-practices
chunk: 303
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

using Finalize
to make sure that when an object is finalized (i.e., goes out
of scope), the dynamically allocated elements are chained on a
free list:

==== rationale ====
See also 6.3.2 for variations
on these problems. A dynamically allocated object is an object
created by the execution of an allocator (new).
Allocated objects referenced by access variables allow you to
generate aliases , which are
multiple references to the same object. Anomalous behavior can
arise when you reference a deallocated object by another name.
This is called a dangling reference. Totally disassociating a
still-valid object from all names is called dropping a pointer.
A dynamically allocated object that is not associated with a name
cannot be referenced or explicitly deallocated.
A dropped pointer depends on an implicit memory
manager for reclamation of space. It also raises questions for
the reader as to whether the loss of access to the object was
intended or accidental.
An Ada environment is not required to provide deallocation of
dynamically allocated objects. If provided, it may be provided
implicitly (objects are deallocated when their access type goes
out of scope), explicitly (objects are deallocated when Ada.Unchecked_Deallocation
is called), or both. To increase the likelihood of the storage
space being reclaimed, it is best to call Ada.Unchecked_Deallocation
explicitly for each dynamically created object when you are finished
using it. Calls to Ada.Unchecked_Deallocation also document
a deliberate decision to abandon an object, making the code easier
to read and understand. To be absolutely certain that space is
reclaimed and reused, manage your own "free
list." Keep track of which objects you are finished with,
and reuse them instead of dynamically allocating new objects later.
The dangers of dangling references are that you may attempt to
use them, thereby accessing memory that you have released to the
memory manager and that may have been subsequently allocated for
another purpose in another part of your program. When you read
from such memory, unexpected errors may occur because the other
part of your program may have previously written totally unrelated
data there. Even worse, when you write to such memory you can
cause errors in an apparently unrelated part of the code by changing
values of variables dynamically allocated by that code. This type
of error can be very difficult to find. Finally, such errors may
be triggered in parts of your environment that you did not write,
for example, in the memory management system itself, which may
dynamically allocate memory to keep records about your dynamically
allocated memory.
Keep in mind that any unreset component of a record or array can
also be a dangling reference or carry a bit pattern representing
inconsistent data. Components of an access type are always initialized
by default to null; however, you should not rely on this
default initialization. To enhance readability and maintainability,
you should include explicit initialization.
Whenever you use dynamic allocation, it is possible to run out
of space. Ada provides a facility (a length clause) for requesting
the size of the pool of allocation space at compile time. Anticipate
that you can still run out at run time. Prepare handlers for the
exception Storage_Error, and consider carefully what
alternatives you may be able to include in the program for each
such situation.
There is a school of thought that dictates avoidance of all dynamic
allocation. It is largely based on the fear of running out of
memory during execution. Facilities, such as length clauses and
exception handlers for Storage_Error, provide explicit
control over memory partitioning and error recovery, making this
fear unfounded.
When implementing a complex data structure (tree, list, sparse
matrices, etc.), you often use access types. If you are not careful,
you can consume all your storage with these dynamically allocated
objects. You could export a deallocate operation, but it is impossible
to ensure that it is called at the proper places; you are, in
effect, trusting the clients. If you derive from controlled types
(see 8.3.3 , and 9.2.3 for more
information), you can use finalization to deal with deallocation
of dynamic data, thus avoiding storage exhaustion. User-defined
storage pools give better control over the allocation policy.
A related but distinct issue is that of shared versus copy semantics:
even if the data structure is implemented using access types,
you do not necessarily want shared semantics. In some instances
you really want := to create a copy, not a new reference,
and you really want = to compare the contents, not the
reference. You should implement your structure as a controlled
type. If you want copy semantics, you can redefine Adjust
to perform a deep copy and = to perform a comparison
on the contents. You can also redefine Finalize to make
sure that when an object is finalized (i.e., goes out of scope)
the dynamically allocated elements are chained on a free list
(or deallocated by Ada.Unchecked_Deallocation).
The implicit use of dynamic (heap) storage by an Ada program during
execution poses significant risks that software failures may occur.
An Ada run-time environment may use implicit dynamic (heap) storage
in association with composite objects, dynamically created tasks,
and catenation. Often, the algorithms used to manage the dynamic
allocation and reclamation of heap storage cause fragmentation
or leakage, which can lead to storage exhaustion. It is usually
very difficult or impossible to recover from storage exhaustion
or Storage_Error without reloading and restarting the
Ada program. It would be very restrictive to avoid all uses of
implicit allocation. On the other hand, preventing both explicit
and implicit deallocation significantly reduces the risks of fragmentation
and leakage without overly restricting your use of composite objects,
access values, task objects, and catenation.
