title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 10
section: programming-practices
chunk: 372
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

ssible, use abstract tagged types and dispatching rather than access-to-subprogram types to implement dynamic selection and invocation of subprograms.

==== data structures ====
When declaring a discriminant, use as constrained a subtype as possible (i.e., subtype with as specific a range constraint as possible).
Use a discriminated record rather than a constrained array to represent an array whose actual values are unconstrained.
Use records to group heterogeneous but related data.
Consider records to map to I/O device data.
Use access types to class-wide types to implement heterogeneous polymorphic data structures.
Use tagged types and type extension rather than variant records (in combination with enumeration types and case statements).
Record structures should not always be flat. Factor out common parts.
For a large record structure, group related components into smaller subrecords.
For nested records, pick element names that read well when inner elements are referenced.
Consider using type extension to organize large data structures.
Differentiate between static and dynamic data. Use dynamically allocated objects with caution.
Use dynamically allocated data structures only when it is necessary to create and destroy them dynamically or to be able to reference them by different names.
Do not drop pointers to undeallocated objects.
Do not leave dangling references to deallocated objects.
Initialize all access variables and components within a record.
Do not rely on memory deallocation.
Deallocate explicitly.
Use length clauses to specify total allocation size.
Provide handlers for Storage_Error .
Use controlled types to implement private types that manipulate dynamic data.
Avoid unconstrained record objects unless your run-time environment reliably reclaims dynamic heap storage.
Unless your run-time environment reliably reclaims dynamic heap storage, declare the following items only in the outermost, unnested declarative part of either a library package, a main subprogram, or a permanent task:
Access types
Constrained composite objects with nonstatic bounds
Objects of an unconstrained composite type other than unconstrainedrecords
Composite objects large enough (at compile time) for the compiler to allocate implicitly on the heap
Unless your run-time environment reliably reclaims dynamic heap storage or you are creating permanent, dynamically allocated tasks, avoid declaring tasks in the following situations:
Unconstrained array subtypes whose components are tasks
Discriminated record subtypes containing a component that is an array of tasks, where the array size depends on the value of the discriminant
Any declarative region other than the outermost, unnested declarative part of either a library package or a main subprogram
Arrays of tasks that are not statically constrained
Minimize the use of aliased variables.
Use aliasing for statically created, ragged arrays (Rationale 1995, §3.7.1).
Use aliasing to refer to part of a data structure when you want to hide the internal connections and bookkeeping information.
Use access discriminants to create self-referential data structures, i.e., a data structure one of whose components points to the enclosing structure.
Use modular types rather than a Boolean arrays when you create data structures that need bit-wise operations, such as and and or.
