title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 10
section: programming-practices
chunk: 375
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

variable when building a record to pass as an actual parameter
Use positional association only when there is a conventional ordering of the arguments.

==== visibility ====
When you need to provide visibility to operators, use the use type clause.
Avoid/minimize the use of the use clause (Nissen and Wallis 1984).
Consider using a package renames clause rather than a use clause for a package.
Consider using the use clause in the following situations:
When standard packages are needed and no ambiguous references are introduced
When references to enumeration literals are needed
Localize the effect of all use clauses.
Limit the scope of a renaming declaration to the minimum necessary scope.
Rename a long, fully qualified name to reduce the complexity if it becomes unwieldy.
Use renaming to provide the body of a subprogram if this subprogram merely calls the first subprogram.
Rename declarations for visibility purposes rather than using the use clause, except for operators .
Rename parts when your code interfaces to reusable components originally written with nondescriptive or inapplicable nomenclature.
Use a project-wide standard list of abbreviations to rename common packages.
Provide a use type rather than a renames clause to provide visibility to operators.
Limit overloading to widely used subprograms that perform similar actions on arguments of different types (Nissen and Wallis 1984).
Preserve the conventional meaning of overloaded operators (Nissen and Wallis 1984).
Use "+" to identify adding, joining, increasing, and enhancing kinds of functions.
Use "-" to identify subtraction, separation, decreasing, and depleting kinds of functions.
Use operator overloading sparingly and uniformly when applied to tagged types.
Define an appropriate equality operator for private types.
Consider redefining the equality operator for a private type.
When overloading the equality operator for types, maintain the properties of an algebraic equivalence relation.
