title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 10
section: programming-practices
chunk: 377
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

s to capture as much information as possible about an exception.
Use blocks to associate localized sections of code with their own exception handlers.

==== erroneous execution and bounded errors ====
Use Ada.Unchecked_Conversion only with the utmost care (Ada Reference Manual 1995, §13.9 [Annotated]).
Consider using the 'Valid attribute to check the validity of scalar data).
Ensure that the value resulting from Ada.Unchecked_Conversion properly represents a value of the parameter's subtype.
Isolate the use of Ada.Unchecked_Conversion in package bodies.
Isolate the use of Ada.Unchecked_Deallocation in package bodies.
Ensure that no dangling reference to the local object exists after exiting the scope of the local object.
Minimize the use of the attribute Unchecked_Access, preferably isolating it to package bodies.
Use the attribute Unchecked_Access only on data whose lifetime/scope is "library level."
Use address clauses to map variables and entries to the hardware device or memory, not to model the FORTRAN "equivalence" feature.
Ensure that the address specified in an attribute definition clause is valid and does not conflict with the alignment.
If available in your Ada environment, use the package Ada.Interrupts to associate handlers with interrupts.
Avoid using the address clause for nonimported program units.
Do not suppress exception checks during development.
If necessary, during operation, introduce blocks that encompass the smallest range of statements that can safely have exception checking removed.
Initialize all objects , including access values, prior to use.
Use caution when initializing access values.
Do not depend on default initialization that is not part of the language.
Derive from a controlled type and override the primitive procedure to ensure automatic initialization.
Ensure elaboration of an entity before using it.
Use function calls in declarations cautiously.
Ensure that values obtained from Ada.Direct_IO and Ada.Sequential_IO are in range.
Use the 'Valid attribute to check the validity of scalar values obtained through Ada.Direct_IO and Ada.Sequential_IO.
Prevent exceptions from propagating outside any user-defined Finalize or Adjust procedure by providing handlers for all predefined and user-defined exceptions at the end of each procedure.
Do not invoke a potentially blocking operation within a protected entry, a protected procedure, or a protected function.
Do not use an asynchronous select statement within abort-deferred operations.
Do not create a task that depends on a master that is included entirely within the execution of an abort-deferred operation.
