title: RefAerial: A Benchmark and Approach for Referring Detection in Aerial Images
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: refaerial-a-benchmark-and-approach-for-referring-detection-in-aerial-images
authors: Guyue Hu; Hao Song; Yuxing Tong; Duzhi Yuan; Dengdi Sun; Aihua Zheng; Chenglong Li; Jin Tang
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 6
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20543v1

Scenes in the Aerial View
“A camera is located between the car and the street lights in
the night.”
“The yellow bus is parked under the streetlights.”

“A girl in light blue clothes and white pants holding a bag is
walking, and a parked yellow bicycle next to her.”
“The yellow bicycle is being ridden by a man
wearing a white shirt and a black backpack.”
“A white truck is driving in the middle-left lane of
the main road, with a white car and an electric
bike rider ahead.”
“A light green sedan is on the zebra crossing heading from the
upper to the lower part of the intersection.”
“A grey sedan with a sleek body in the middle
lane of the right-side highway.”
“A white sedan driving on the central main road.”
Figure 2. Illustration of challenges and samples in the RefAerial dataset.
Table 1. Comparing our RefAerial with existing ground referring
detection datasets. The RefAerial significantly distinguishes from
them regarding object-to-scene ratios, target numbers, description
complexity, bounding-box numbers, and scene scenarios. O2S Ratio (%): object-to-scene ratio in the form of Mean (Standard Deviation). Word No.: number of words per expression in the form
of Mean (Standard Deviation). Target No.: average number of annotated referring targets per image. Bbox No.: total number of
bounding boxes in the whole dataset. Resolution represents the
average resolution of images in the dataset.
Items RefCOCO RefCOCOg RefCOCO+ RefAerial
O2S Ratio 11.4 (8.5) 11.0 (9.4) 11.1 (8.6) 5.6(10.5)
Word No. 3.61 (2.0) 8.43 (3.5) 3.53 (2.1) 12.5(3.8)
Target No. 2.5 1.9 2.5 11.4
Bbox No. 51K 55K 50K 115K
Resolution 592×485 583×480 592×485 1920x1080
wide and significant applications in emergency rescue, agricultural monitoring, ecological protection, anti-drone confrontation, etc.
To activate and advance the research and application of
referring detection in aerial images, we collect and annotate
a large-scale challenging datasets for referring aerial image
detection, termed as RefAerial. It distinguishes from classical ground referring detection datasets by 4 remarkable
characteristics (as shown in Fig. 2). (1)Low but diverse
object-to-scene ratios:since the aerial devices inherently
have broader scope compared to ground devices, the referring object in aerial images typically occupies small portion
of pixels in the overall scene. In addition, diverse scales
of objects are commonly contained within and across aerial
images (see Table 1 and Fig. 1a). Thus, the low but diverse
object-to-scene ratio significantly increases the difficulty of
object discrimination, spatial localization, and boundary estimation for referring detection in aerial images. (2)Numerous targets and distractors:an aerial image typically
contains numerous potential target categories and each referring target in one specific semantic category may also
be accompanied with numerous similar distractors nearby
(such as the girl and bicycle in Fig. 2), please see Table
1 for more details. Thus, it is very challenging to recognize and discriminate the referring target from other distractors with contextual information. (3)Complex and
fine-grained referring descriptions:the descriptions in
mainstream ground referring detection datasets are usually
short and coarse-grained, while our RefAerial dataset covers complex (long and diverse) and fine-grained referring
descriptions (see Fig. 1b and Table 1). Its descriptions have
an average length of 12.5 words, and short and long descriptions are nearly balanced. Thus, the complex and finegrained referring descriptions substantially increase the linguistic complexity. (4)Diverse and broad scenes in the
aerial view:in contrast to small and centralized ground
scenes, our RefAerial are collected from broad aerial scenes
with diverse environmental conditions regarding altitude,
view, weather, area, etc.
Besides, we observe that existing ground referring detection approaches face serious performance degradation on
our aerial referring detection dataset since the intrinsic scale
variety issue within or across aerial images (as shown in Ta-
