title: RefAerial: A Benchmark and Approach for Referring Detection in Aerial Images
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: refaerial-a-benchmark-and-approach-for-referring-detection-in-aerial-images
authors: Guyue Hu; Hao Song; Yuxing Tong; Duzhi Yuan; Dengdi Sun; Aihua Zheng; Chenglong Li; Jin Tang
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 7
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20543v1

formance degradation on
our aerial referring detection dataset since the intrinsic scale
variety issue within or across aerial images (as shown in Ta-

ble 1). To address such issue, we further propose a novel
scale-comprehensive and sensitive (SCS) framework characterized with a mixture-of-granularity (MoG) attention
and a two-stage comprehensive-to-sensitive (CtS) decoding
strategy. Specifically, the mixture-of-granularity (MoG) attention is developed to scale-comprehensively understand
potential targets in each aerial image. The comprehensiveto-sensitive decoding (CtS) strategy is designed to decode
referring targets in a progressive coarse-to-fine manner.
Overall, the main contributions of this work are 4 folds:
• Responding to low-altitude economy, we extend referring
detection from conventional ground images to emerging
aerial images and build a large-scale dataset RefAerial for
referring aerial image detection.
• We develop a human-in-the-loop referring expansion and
annotation engine (REA-Engine), which realizes efficient
and semi-automated referring pair annotation.
• We propose a novel scale-comprehensive and sensitive
framework (SCS) for referring aerial image detection,
which effectively tackles the remarkable scale variety issue of referring objects within and across aerial images.
• The proposed SCS framework realizes remarkable performance on our aerial dataset and even promising performance boost on ground datasets, demonstrating the effectiveness and superiority of our approach.
2. Related Work
2.1. Referring Detection Datasets
With the rapid advancement of visual technologies, an increasing number of referring detection (a.k.a visual grounding) datasets have been proposed, such as RefCOCO
[35], RefCOCO+ [35], RefCOCOg [21], and Flickr30k
[23]. Specifically, RefCOCO emphasizes interactive short
phrases, RefCOCO+ restricts the use of spatial terms to
increase semantic reasoning difficulty, and RefCOCOg focuses on long and context-rich expressions. These datasets
have collectively driven significant technical advances of
referring detection, such as multimodal modeling, crossmodal alignment, and language-guided localization. Despite serving as a standard evaluation benchmark, the RefCOCO series of datasets are inherently expanded from
COCO dataset, in which the referring targets usually are
centered in small ground scenes and also relatively large. In
contrast, the benchmark and approach for referring detection in broad aerial-view scenes remains underdeveloped.
2.2. Referring Detection Methods
Referring expression comprehension methods are typically
categorized into two paradigms: two-stage methods and
one-stage methods. Two-stage approaches [4, 11, 36, 37]
first generate region proposals with an object detector and
then match these candidates with the given expression.
These methods often yield high localization accuracy but
suffer from limited inference efficiency, which hinders their
applicability in real-time scenarios. In contrast, one-stage
methods [16, 32, 33] jointly encode visual and linguistic inputs in an end-to-end manner to directly predict the referred
object, offering superior efficiency and broader potential
for real-world deployment. Recently, Transformer-based
architectures [18, 26, 31, 34] have been widely adopted
for multimodal fusion for referring detection, yielding significant performance improvement. Additionally, several
works fine-tuned large-scale pre-trained Vision-Language
Models (VLMs) [2, 28–30], leveraging their strong semantic priors to further enhance grounding performance. Although these high success of referring detection approaches
in ground images, these face serious performance degradation on our aerial referring detection dataset, thus encouraging the exploring of more robust and adaptable methods for
referring detection in aerial images.
3. RefAerial Dataset
In this section, we introduce how to collect, and then expand
and annotate the aerial RefAerial dataset via the proposed
semi-automated human-in-the-loop referring expansion and
annotation engine (REA-Engine) in detail. Then, we highlight its statistics and characteristics compared to existing
ground referring detection datasets.
3.1. Aerial Image Collection
We first collect abundant aerial images with high-resolution
(1920×1080) drone devices under diverse real-world conditions. The data are collected in diverse outdoor environments to cover various scene complexities, viewpoints, and
object types. As shown in Table 2, RefAerial dataset contains more than 30 categories of aerial-view targets (such as
people, cars, trees, buildings, etc.), covering multiple types
of environments and geographical contexts. It include different area types (urban and suburban), representative locations (university, park, crossroad, lake, residential block,
etc.), and multiple flight altitudes (30m, 90m, 150 m). The
view angles ranging from 0◦ to 90◦, covering steep-oblique
to near-nadir perspectives, which introduces large appearance and scale variations. Moreover, the dataset encompasses diverse illumination (daytime, overcast, nighttime)
and weather conditions (clear, cloudy, light rain). Thus, the
aerial images in RefAerial contain enough representativeness and diversity for real-world aerial referring detection.
3.2. Referring Expansion and Annotation Engine
Annotating the visual bounding-box and textual description
pair of referring targets is much complicated and expensive. Beyond manual annotation, we develop an advanced
referring expansion and annotation engine (REA-Engine)
that leverages the capabilities of powerful large multimodal
