title: RefAerial: A Benchmark and Approach for Referring Detection in Aerial Images
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: refaerial-a-benchmark-and-approach-for-referring-detection-in-aerial-images
authors: Guyue Hu; Hao Song; Yuxing Tong; Duzhi Yuan; Dengdi Sun; Aihua Zheng; Chenglong Li; Jin Tang
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 8
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20543v1

annotation, we develop an advanced
referring expansion and annotation engine (REA-Engine)
that leverages the capabilities of powerful large multimodal

UpdateFilter
The man
in a black
shirt and
grey pant
while
crossing
the street
×N
Open-Vocabulary
Detection
Prompt for Object and Details
Prompt for Whole Image
Describe the [key objects],
[colors], [characteristics], and
their [spatial relationships]
Describe the [whole image] with
[background of the scene] and
[interactions of objects]
Referees
Positive & Negative
Samples
"a man in
black shirt is
walking ...."
"a truck with
white paint is
parked ..."
"I can't find ..."
"I can't help ..."
"The silver sedan
is parked on the
zebra crossing."
MFMs-assisted Referring Pair Generator
Input
Prompt
The silver sedan is parked on the
zebra crossing under the streetlight
A black bicycle parked on the road, closest to
the streetlight
Parked on the zebra crossing, the silver sedan is lit
up by the streetlight above
A man
wearing
a black
shirt is
walking
on the
zebra
crossing
Human Experts
Multimodal Foundation Models l 115k Annotations
Semi-automated Vision-to-Text Expander
l 11.4 Target No. l 12.5 Word No.
Bbox-Description Pairs
l10K+ RefAerial images
l30+ Categories
lDiverse conditions
(areas, altitudes,
weather , ...)
UpdateFilter
Figure 3. Overview of the referring expansion and annotation engine (REA-Engine). It is a semi-automated human-in-the-loop annotation
framework that integrates large-scale multimodal foundation models (MFMs) with human experts to generate high-quality referring pair
annotation for aerial images.
foundation models (MFMs) for collaborative enhancement.
As a result, REA-Engine enables semi-automated humanin-the-loop annotation workflows to produce fine-grained
and reliable aerial referring detection datasets. As shown
in Fig. 3, REA-Engine consists of two modules (including
the Vision-to-Text Expander and MFMs-assisted Referring
Pair Generator) guided by feedback from referees.
3.2.1. Semi-automated Vision-to-Text Expander
We first develop a vision-to-text expander (V2T expander)
to efficiently expand aerial images with detailed language
description containing global scene, salient object, finegrained details for referring pair generating. The V2T expander is a semi-automated human-in-the-loop workflow
that leverages the powerful multimodal comprehend capabilities in off-the-shelf large MFMs (such as GPT4 [1] and
CogVLM [27]) in conjunction with the guidance from human experts. As shown in Fig. 3, the V2T expander consists
of 3 levels of semantic prompts and receives feedback from
referees. Specifically, the global scene prompt elicits holistic scene-level description (such as contextual background),
the salient object prompt guide the description of key entities, and the fine-grained prompt encompasses detailed attributes and relations (such as color, position, interactions).
Furthermore, the referees empowered by MFMs and human
experts operate in a closed feedback loop with follow-up
MFMs-assisted referring pair generator and iterative human
validation, facilitating continual improvement in both granularity, precision, and coverage of language descriptions.
3.2.2. MFMs-assisted Referring Pair Generator
We further develop a semi-automated MFMs-assisted referring pair generator (MaRP generator) to generate and refine the referring pair of{Bbox, description}from above
preliminary descriptions. Specifically, we finetune a large
foundation segmentation model (i.e. SAM [13]) as internal
object detector to recognize and localize object entities reTable 2. Condition statistics of aerial images in RefAerial dataset.
Condition Category StatisticsFlight Altitude (m)30 90 150 32% 40% 28%Camera Angle (°)0–30 30–60 60–90 25% 57% 18%Illumination Day Overcast Night 61% 21% 18%Weather Clear Cloudy Light rain65% 22% 13%Scene Type 25 /Target Category 32 /
ferred to by coarse language expressions. Then, the image
with object bounding box (Bbox) annotation will feed into
a large MFMs again to generate more fine-grained and accurate referring descriptions, the external knowledge contained in general MFMs also enriches the semantic diversity
of the detection descriptions. Finally, the MaRP generator
generated pair candidates will be forwarded into the referees, where the MFMs and human experts further collaboratively refine to obtain the final referring pairs. In details,
the referees conduct consistency validation, redundancy removal, and semantic correction to guarantee each referring pair is fine-grained, accurate, visible, and informationdense. During this process, the MFMs automatically filter
and score image–text pairs, merging near-duplicate descriptions into unified candidates with associated confidence
scores. Human experts review the high-confidence samples, providing corrections and quality judgments. Their
feedback is then used to retrain and calibrate the MFMs,
forming a closed-loop refinement cycle that typically converges within 3–5 iterations. The MaRP generator not only
significantly reduces the burden of manual annotation, but
also strengthens the capability of object perception and language understanding under complex scenarios, which lays
a solid foundation for high-quality Bbox-description pairs.
3.3. Dataset Details
In this section, we provide statistics of our RefAerial and
compare it with existing ground referring detection datasets.
