title: RSRCC: A Remote Sensing Regional Change Comprehension Benchmark Constructed via Retrieval-Augmented Best-of-N Ranking
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: rsrcc-a-remote-sensing-regional-change-comprehension-benchmark-constructed-via-retrieval-augmented-best-of-n-ranking
authors: Roie Kazoom; Yotam Gigi; George Leifman; Tomer Shekel; Genady Beryozkin
page: 1
section: rag-db
chunk: 45
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20623v1

mplesas is, without applying any of our filtering criteria, to
maintain consistency with prior work and preserve the original dataset distribution.
18

1.Uniformity filter:Patches with low pixel intensity variation are discarded. If
𝜎(𝑋)< 𝜏 std, 𝜏 std =0.08,(32)
the patch is excluded.
2.Low saturation filter:Patches with low mean saturation in HSV space are removed. If
1
𝐻𝑊
𝐻∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑊∑︁
𝑗=1
𝑆𝑖 𝑗 < 𝜏sat, 𝜏 sat =0.15,(33)
the patch is discarded.
3.Vegetation filter:Using the Excess Green Index,
ExG=2𝐺−𝑅−𝐵,(34)
patches dominated by vegetation are removed if
1
𝐻𝑊
𝐻∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑊∑︁
𝑗=1
ExG𝑖 𝑗 > 𝜏ExG, 𝜏 ExG =0.35.(35)
Algorithm 3Patch Filtering Process
1:Input:Image patch𝑋∈R 𝐻×𝑊×3 , thresholds𝜏std, 𝜏sat, 𝜏ExG
2:Output:Keep or discard decision
3:Compute pixel intensity standard deviation𝜎(𝑋)
4:if𝜎(𝑋)< 𝜏 std then
5:Discard patch
6:end if
7:Convert𝑋to HSV, compute mean saturation ¯𝑆
8:if ¯𝑆 < 𝜏sat then
9:Discard patch
10:end if
11:Compute Excess Green Index: ExG=2𝐺−𝑅−𝐵
12:Compute mean ExG
13:if ExG> 𝜏 ExG then
14:Discard patch
15:end if
16:Keep patch
F.1 IoU Threshold Calibration
To determine an appropriate intersection-over-union (IoU) threshold for identifying true object-level
changes, we conducted a controlled calibration experiment using human evaluation over a randomly
selectedsubsetof100imagepairs. Eachpairwasmanuallyannotatedtoindicatewhethertheobserved
differences corresponded to genuine structural change (e.g., new construction, building removal) or
false change (e.g., illumination shifts, vegetation growth, or shadow variations). We then compared
these binary human judgments against a continuous range of IoU values computed between masks at
times𝑡and𝑡+Δ𝑡.
Figure 6 illustrates the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis used to optimize the IoU
threshold 𝜏iou. The ROC curve evaluates the trade-off between true positive rate (TPR) and false
positive rate (FPR) when varying𝜏iou over the interval[0,1] . The analysis achieved an area under the
curve (AUC) of 0.91, confirming that IoU is a strong discriminator of true versus false changes. The
optimal threshold𝜏iou =0.18 corresponds to the maximal Youden’s𝐽 index, representing the most
balanced separation between changed and unchanged regions as perceived by human evaluators.
To further illustrate the decision boundary, Figure 7 shows the ROC curve corresponding to the
optimal threshold𝜏iou =0.18 . The near-perfect separation (AUC=0.79 ) demonstrates that human
judgments align well with this empirical threshold, providing an interpretable and reproducible
boundary for localizing true changes while suppressing noisy detections.
19
