title: A Beginner's Guide to MS Windows Optimization
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: a-beginner-s-guide-to-ms-windows-optimization
authors: 
page: 1
section: a-beginner-s-guide-to-ms-windows-optimization
chunk: 16
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/A_Beginner%27s_Guide_to_MS_Windows_Optimization

w lets get to some practical stuff. Preparation for destruction. There are two schools of managing the slow PC problem. Stay and play or kill 'em all.

Stay and play: Basically you install more RAM memory, delete the unnecessary programs, run antivirus, and install resource efficient programs. This method is safer, less time consuming (mostly) and less complex. If you choose this, go to (start->Control Panel->Programs->Programs and Features) and start deleting everything you don't need. And what don't you need? Well, I don't know, that's why its better to choose the other option. But if you don't want to wipe everything, jump to step 6.
Kill 'em all: You make a backup, antivirus scan it and wipe the disk. Then you install a fresh version of Windows with the latest service pack (SP). This method has more risks.
The biggest one being that you might delete something you forgot to backup.
And the second one is that you may get stuck in the process of installing the operating system, and may have to call for help. But remember, the only damage that you may cause is easily reversible. Formatting the disk and installing new operating system will not cause any permanent damage to the hardware. Just don't forget about the backup.
And really, its not that difficult to install Windows, just press “next” if you are uncertain.
On the positive side, this is the best method of optimization, and the only way to be sure to get rid of all the viruses, trojans, ad ware and other nasty stuff that may parasite your PC . And this is the method I recommend strongly. Its not that hard, really. Just follow the guide and you will be fine.
Preparing for a format may be quite boring, but it's important to do it correctly. Just follow those steps.
