title: A Beginner's Guide to MS Windows Optimization
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: a-beginner-s-guide-to-ms-windows-optimization
authors: 
page: 1
section: a-beginner-s-guide-to-ms-windows-optimization
chunk: 17
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/A_Beginner%27s_Guide_to_MS_Windows_Optimization

ust follow the guide and you will be fine.
Preparing for a format may be quite boring, but it's important to do it correctly. Just follow those steps.

Do backup! On external medium. Check and double check.
Prepare the installation CD/DVDs
If you want to try W7, borrow the DVD from a friend or get it from a torrent site. You don't have to activate it, just install and try and see how well it works on your PC. If you like it, go and buy it. If not, install back your old operating system.
If you are installing your old system, write down the activation serial number, its usually on a Microsoft sticker somewhere on the PC.
Its good to install Windows with the latest service pack. As for today, Windows XP has service pack 3, Vista has service pack 2. And W7 doesn't have one yet.
If you want an updated operating system DVD with latest service pack, visit ones again a friend or a torrent site, or other places that you may know.
If you use a old DVD without the latest service pack, you will have to install them later anyway, and it is very time consuming. So do try to get an updated version. You can also slipstream a service pack(Windows XP only). Google it if you are interested.
One important thing here, don't install Windows XP with no service pack or with service pack 1. Those versions don't have a build in firewall. Meaning your computer will be exposed to the internet without and protection. Its like having unprotected sex with an unknown person, stupid stupid idea. A firewall protects you from a virus type called worms, they infect your computer, when you are connected to the internet. And the most important thing, you don't have to do anything, you will not even notice anything. Like a STD. Once you are in (connected), you are fu**ed.
One more thing, when you are installing Windows from a CD/DVD you got with the computer, or if you are installing it from a recovery program, remember, very often, if not always, you will get a lot of crap programs installed too. This is a way of the PC manufacturers to earn money, so this is another reason to get a clean OEM CD/DVD.
To get a clean OEM CD/DVD with the chosen operating system, go ask around your friends, ask the geeks (they will know) or go to a computer store and ask what you have to do to get a clean Windows OEM CD/DVD.
Or you can download it, but this option is often a violation of the copyright, but hey if you have illegal copies of movies and music, cause I guess most of you have, so I guess you won't mind. But don't get me wrong, I buy my software, I believe that if a program is good, it should be bought.
Download drivers
If you have a laptop or non custom assembled PC, go to the web site of the manufacturer and download the latest drivers for your PC. E.g., if you have a HP, go to hp.com and go to support, and write in your model number there. Then the web site should show you the way. This step is good to do. It may be hard to find the drivers on the website, but try to find them, especially the network drivers, in case a fresh Windows install won't find the proper ones. Windows 7 has a lot of drivers build in, and it found all mine that were important. But just in case, download them.
If you have a custom assembled PC, go to the website of the motherboard manufacturer, in my case Asus (Asus.com) and download the drivers from there, especially the network drivers.
If you find a BIOS update, you can download it too. But remember, updating your bios may damage your hardware, so if you don't know what you are doing, don't update the bios. Or ask someone for help.
If you don't find any drivers, you can always hope for the best and install Window anyway. And if that fails you can always go back to your old installation (old installation CD or recovery).
And don't use the drivers you got on a CD with the computer, they are usually old. Download the newest once from the website. And in case you can't find the drivers, and Windows doesn't work without them, then maybe consider using old drivers. Remember, most computer crashes are caused by old/bad drivers.
To help you on the way, a small explanation about torrents. To use bit torrent technology, you first need a program do download stuff with, called a bit torrent client. A good one is uTorrent. Don't use the Azureus/Vuze, its slow and resource hungry.
Download uTorrent and install it. Its for free and a virus free program.
Now you need a place to download torrent files from, a torrent file is a small file containing instructions for the bit torrent client how and where from to download the files you want to get. A place like this is called a tracker. A good one is The Pirate Bay.
So for example, you want to download Ubuntu, or any other operating system. Ubuntu is open source and fully legal to download. First install uTorrent. Then visit thepiratebay.org, mark the “application” box and “search titles only” box and search for Ubuntu.
Here we see the results. On the top of the page, we can see 7 columns.
