title: A Beginner's Guide to MS Windows Optimization
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: a-beginner-s-guide-to-ms-windows-optimization
authors: 
page: 1
section: a-beginner-s-guide-to-ms-windows-optimization
chunk: 18
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/A_Beginner%27s_Guide_to_MS_Windows_Optimization

mark the “application” box and “search titles only” box and search for Ubuntu.
Here we see the results. On the top of the page, we can see 7 columns.

Type: It is the category of the file, for Ubuntu its “Applications > UNIX”. Yes Linux is an UNIX like system.
Name: Its the name of the file with a short description.
Uploaded: the date when the torrent file was uploaded.
Next column is nameless, its a fast link to download the file.
Size: Size of the file.
SE: Seeders, its the estimated amount of people that have the complete file.
LE: Leechers, its the estimated amount of people that is downloading the file.
Now to download the Ubuntu file, we want to download it from the best source, with the highest number of Seeders, if a file has 0 or 1 seeders, it may be very difficult to download it, especially if the file is big.
So we click on the SE to sort the result my the number of Seeders.
And now we click on the file we want to download. And click “download this torrent”. Download it to the desktop, it will be easy to find it then.
Now double click on the torrent file you downloaded, to open it in uTorrent. The program will ask you where you want to save the big Ubuntu file, just put it on the desktop too, its easier that way.
And now we have to wait until the file finishes. It may take some time, but read further so you know what has to be done.
Most files that you download, that contain an operating system, are stored in an .iso file, e.g. Ubuntu.iso.
An iso file is like a .zip file. It acts like a container for other files. So what you should get once the download is finished, is ONE big file. Called something.iso. If its many .rar files, you need to unpack them with 7zip. But let's assume it's one big .iso file.
Now once download is finished, we have to copy (burn) this .iso file to a DVD (or CD if the file is small enough). To do this we need to use a CD/DVD recording program. A good and free one is Imgburn, NERO is good too, but it's big, slow and expensive.
To be able to record CD/DVDs you need a blank CD/DVD and a CD/DVD burner. Nowadays everyone has one, and if you don't, copy the file over to an usb drive and visit your friend. Imgburn will tell you if it can find a CD/DVD burner.
So, to burn the CD/DVD, just download Imgburn, install, click write Image file to disk. Choose the file we downloaded, and click on the icon on the bottom left corner, the one with a disk with an arrow to the CD. And the program will start recording. When the program is done, we have a fresh CD/DVD with the operating system of our choice.
Summary: OK, so we have done the backup, we checked its compete. And we checked it again. We have a clean OEM CD/DVD with Windows on it, and we checked its with the latest service pack (SP3 for XP, SP2 for Vista). And we have all the drivers from the website on an usb drive. OK, next step.
