title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 13
section: reusability
chunk: 478
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

DT in the second example differed from the ADO in the first example; it exports the Stack type, which allows the user to declare any number of stacks:

==== rationale ====
The biggest advantage of an ADT over an ADO (or a GADT over a GADO) is that the user of the package can declare as many objects as desired with an ADT. These objects can be declared as standalone variables or as components of arrays and records. They can also be passed as parameters. None of this is possible with an ADO, where the single data object is encapsulated inside of the package. Furthermore, an ADO provides no more protection of the data structure than an ADT. When a private type is exported by the ADT package, as in the example above, then for both the ADO and ADT, the only legal operations that can modify the data are those defined explicitly by the package (in this case, Push and Pop). For these reasons, an ADT or GADT is almost always preferable to an ADO or GADO, respectively.
A GADO is similar to an ADT in one way: it allows multiple objects to be created by the user. With an ADT, multiple objects can be declared using the type defined by the ADT package. With a GADO (even a GADO with no generic formal parameters, as shown in the third example), the package can be instantiated multiple times to produce multiple objects. However, the similarity ends there. The multiple objects produced by the instantiations suffer from all restrictions described above for ADOs; they cannot be used in arrays or records or passed as parameters. Furthermore, the objects are each of a different type, and no operations are defined to operate on more than one of them at a time. For example, there cannot be an operation to compare two such objects or to assign one to another. The multiple objects declared using the type defined by an ADT package suffer from no such restrictions; they can be used in arrays and records and can be passed as parameters. Also, they are all declared to be of the same type, so that it is possible for the ADT package to provide operations to assign, compare, copy, etc. For these reasons, an ADT is almost always preferable to a parameterless GADO.
The biggest advantage of a GADT or GADO over an ADT or ADO, respectively, is that the GADT and GADO are generic and can thus be parameterized with types, subprograms, and other configuration information. Thus, as shown above, a single generic package can support bounded stacks of any data type and any stack size, while the ADT and ADO above are restricted to stacks of Integer, no more than 100 in size. For this reason, a GADO or GADT is almost always preferable to an ADO or ADT.
The list of examples above is given in order of increasing power and flexibility, starting with an ADO and ending with a GADT. These advantages are not expensive in terms of complexity or development time. The specification of the GADT above is not significantly harder to write or understand than the specification of the ADO. The bodies are also nearly identical.
Compare the body for the simplest version, the ADO:
