title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 13
section: reusability
chunk: 482
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

code fragments from Rationale (1995, §4.4.4) to show an iterator using type extension and dispatching:

The general purpose iterator looks like this:

==== rationale ====
Iteration over complex data structures is often required and, if not provided by the part itself, can be difficult to implement without violating information hiding principles.
Active and passive iterators each have their advantages, but neither is appropriate in all situations. Therefore, it is recommended that both be provided to give the user a choice of which to use in each situation.
Passive iterators are simpler and less error-prone than active iterators, in the same way that the for loop is simpler and less error-prone than the while loop. There are fewer mistakes that the user can make in using a passive iterator. Simply instantiate it with the routine to be executed for each list element, and call the instantiation for the desired list. Active iterators require more care by the user. Care must be taken to invoke the iterator operations in the proper sequence and to associate the proper iterator variable with the proper list variable. It is possible for a change made to the software during maintenance to introduce an error, perhaps an infinite loop.
On the other hand, active iterators are more flexible than passive iterators. With a passive iterator, it is difficult to perform multiple, concurrent, synchronized iterations. For example, it is much easier to use active iterators to iterate over two sorted lists, merging them into a third sorted list. Also, for multidimensional data structures, a small number of active iterator routines may be able to replace a large number of passive iterators, each of which implements one combination of the active iterators. Finally, active iterators can be passed as generic formal parameters while passive iterators cannot because passive iterators are themselves generic, and generic units cannot be passed as parameters to other generic units.
For either type of iterator, semantic questions can arise about what happens when the data structure is modified as it is being iterated. When writing an iterator, be sure to consider this possibility, and indicate with comments the behavior that occurs in such a case. It is not always obvious to the user what to expect. For example, to determine the "closure" of a mathematical "set" with respect to some operation, a common algorithm is to iterate over the members of the set, generating new elements and adding them to the set. In such a case, it is important that elements added to the set during the iteration be encountered subsequently during the iteration. On the other hand, for other algorithms, it may be important that the iterated set is the same set that existed at the beginning of the iteration. In the case of a prioritized list data structure, if the list is iterated in priority order, it may be important that elements inserted at lower priority than the current element during iteration not be encountered subsequently during the iteration but that elements inserted at a higher priority should be encountered. In any case, make a conscious decision about how the iterator should operate, and document that behavior in the package specification.
Deletions from the data structure also pose a problem for iterators. It is a common mistake for a user to iterate over a data structure, deleting it piece by piece during the iteration. If the iterator is not prepared for such a situation, it is possible to end up dereferencing a null pointer or committing a similar error. Such situations can be prevented by storing extra information with each data structure, which indicates whether it is currently being iterated, and using this information to disallow any modifications to the data structure during iteration. When the data structure is declared as a limited private type, as should usually be the case when iterators are involved, the only operations defined on the type are declared explicitly in the package that declares the type, making it possible to add such tests to all modification operations.
The Rationale (1995, §4.4.4) notes that the access discriminant and type extension techniques are inversions of each other. In the access discriminant approach, you have to write out the looping mechanism for each action. In the type extension approach, you write one loop and dispatch to the desired action. Thus, an iterator that uses the access discriminant technique would be considered active, while an iterator that uses the type extension technique would be considered passive.
