title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 13
section: reusability
chunk: 503
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

abbreviations in identifier or unit names.
Document the expected behavior of generic formal parameters just as you document any package specification.

=== robustness ===
Use named numbers and static expressions to allow multiple dependencies to be linked to a small number of symbols.
Use unconstrained array types for array formal parameters and array return values.
Make the size of local variables depend on actual parameter size, where appropriate.
Minimize the number of assumptions made by a unit.
For assumptions that cannot be avoided, use subtypes or constraints to automatically enforce conformance.
For assumptions that cannot be automatically enforced by subtypes, add explicit checks to the code.
Document all assumptions.
If the code depends upon the implementation of a specific Special Needs Annex for proper operation, document this assumption in the code.
Use first subtypes when declaring generic formal objects of mode in out.
Beware of using subtypes as subtype marks when declaring parameters or return values of generic formal subprograms.
Use attributes rather than literal values.
Be careful about overloading the names of subprograms exported by the same generic package.
Within a specification, document any tasks that would be activated by with'ing the specification and by using any part of the specification.
Document which generic formal parameters are accessed from a task hidden inside the generic unit.
Document any multithreaded components.
Propagate exceptions out of reusable parts. Handle exceptions within reusable parts only when you are certain that the handling is appropriate in all circumstances.
Propagate exceptions raised by generic formal subprograms after performing any cleanup necessary to the correct operation of future invocations of the generic instantiation.
Leave state variables in a valid state when raising an exception.
Leave parameters unmodified when raising an exception.
