title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 13
section: reusability
chunk: 504
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

of the generic instantiation.
Leave state variables in a valid state when raising an exception.
Leave parameters unmodified when raising an exception.

=== adaptability ===
Provide core functionality in a reusable part or set of parts so that the functionality in this abstraction can be meaningfully extended by its reusers.
More specifically, provide initialization and finalization procedures for every data structure that may contain dynamic data.
For data structures needing initialization and finalization, consider deriving them, when possible, from the types Ada.Finalization.Controlled or Ada.Finalization.Limited_Controlled.
Use generic units to avoid code duplication.
Parameterize generic units for maximum adaptability.
Reuse common instantiations of generic units, as well as the generic units themselves.
Consider using a limited private type for a generic formal type when you do not need assignment on objects of the type inside the generic body.
Consider using a nonlimited private type for a generic formal type when you need normal assignment on objects of the type inside the body of the generic.
Consider using a formal tagged type derived from Ada.Finalization.Controlled when you need to enforce special assignment semantics on objects of the type in the body of the generic.
Export the least restrictive type that maintains the integrity of the data and abstraction while allowing alternate implementations.
Consider using a limited private abstract type for generic formal types of a generic that extends a formal private tagged type.
Use generic units to encapsulate algorithms independently of data type.
Consider using abstract data types (not to be confused with Ada's abstract types) in preference to abstract data objects.
Consider using generic units to implement abstract data types independently of their component data type.
Provide iterators for traversing complex data structures within reusable parts.
Consider providing both active and passive iterators.
Protect the iterators from errors due to modification of the data structure during iteration.
Document the behavior of the iterators when the data structure is modified during traversal.
Localize the currency symbol, digits separator, radix mark, and fill character in picture output.
Consider using the # character in picture layouts so that the edited numeric output lengths are invariant across currency symbols of different lengths.
Consider using abstract tagged types and generics to define reusable units of functionality that can be "mixed into" core abstractions (also known as mixins).
Consider structuring subsystems so that operations that are only used in a particular context are in different child packages than operations used in a different context.
Consider declaring context-independent functionality in the parent package and context-dependent functionality in child packages.
