title: A Neutral Look at Operating Systems
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: a-neutral-look-at-operating-systems
authors: 
page: 10
section: microsoft-windows
chunk: 55
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/A_Neutral_Look_at_Operating_Systems

ons of Windows in favor of the NT-based varieties. Windows 2000, Windows XP, Windows 2003, and Windows Vista are all based on Windows NT architecture.

As an interesting sidenote, Windows NT (WNT) was marketed as "Windows New Technology", and was often guessed by users to be "Windows Networking Technology" because networking was made native to Windows NT. It has later been disclosed, however, that WNT was actually a play on VMS (another operating system) - in the same manner as 2001: A Space Odyssey's HAL was supposedly a play on IBM.
In designing the Windows operating systems, Microsoft had decided that user friendliness was the main goal of the design. As a side effect, Windows systems generally did not have adequate security settings enabled by default, even in NT-based versions until the release of Windows XP SP2 and Windows Vista, and therefore could still be compromised if connected "out-of-the-box" to the Internet directly. In fact, many users have complained that their computers became infected with various worms and viruses even while installing Windows XP. However, since the release of Windows Vista - the first Microsoft operating system to be developed using the Trust Computing Development Lifecycle, these problems have largely become irrelevant. Windows includes software for sharing an Internet connection between Windows computers connected on the same network, as well as rudimentary firewall software for protecting the network. Since Windows Vista, Microsoft ships an anti-spyware solution built-in and a free anti-virus solution called Microsoft Security Essentials is currently in beta, with plans to be made available for free to all users of Genuine Windows. For even better security (usually recommended for home or small business networks), a separate hardware-based switch with an integrated firewall is a wiser solution. Such hardware can be purchased for as little as $30 US. (This security measure can, in fact, be used with any operating system, not just Windows.)
A 2008 study comparing the source code quality of Linux, the Windows Research Kernel (a derivative of the Windows 2003 Kernel), FreeBSD and Solaris found that the quality of code was roughly equivalent
See Windows Software.
Windows NT and VMS: The Rest of the Story.
