title: Ask Only When Needed: Proactive Retrieval from Memory and Skills for Experience-Driven Lifelong Agents
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: ask-only-when-needed-proactive-retrieval-from-memory-and-skills-for-experience-driven-lifelong-agents
authors: Yuxuan Cai; Jie Zhou; Qin Chen; Liang He
page: 3
section: 12
chunk: 37
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20572v1

es share the identical prefix, this signal is attached to the necessity of retrieval at
the current state rather than to unrelated earlier actions.
14

ICALK@ECNU
• Learning what to retrieve.The updated action is not a generic retrieval flag, but the instantiated action
RETRIEVE(q tb). Consequently, the same gradient step also reinforces or suppresses the specific query content
qtb. Queries that retrieve a useful experience Ete increase the downstream environment return, are more likely
to induce a positive rollout margin ∆i, and receive positive process-level reinforcement through rproc
i . In
contrast, vague or irrelevant queries tend to produce weak or negative margins and therefore lose relative
probability. This is why PROACTRL learns the wording of the query jointly with the timing of retrieval.
Consequently, the shared-prefix paired-branch construction explains why PROACTRL can learn both when to retrieve
and what to retrieve: the branch comparison supplies a local preference update for triggering retrieval, and that same
update is tied to the concrete query instance that produced the observed downstream outcome.
B Algorithm Details
This section provides the complete algorithmic description of PROACTAGENT, complementing the formal definitions in
Section 3. Algorithm 1 outlines the full online co-evolution loop that interleaves policy optimization with experience
accumulation. Algorithm 2 details the paired-branch reward computation that supplies step-level supervision for
retrieval decisions.
Algorithm 1Experience-Enhanced Online Evolution
Require:Base policyπ θ, empty experience baseD, task streamX, group sizeG
Ensure:Evolved policyπ θ, populated experience baseD
1:Cold Start:Trainπ θ via SFT on successful trajectories▷Appendix D.1
2:foreach training iterationdo
3:Sample task batch{x 1, . . . , xB}fromX
4:foreach taskxin batchdo
5:fori= 1, . . . , Gdo
6:Retrieve initial contextD 0 ←TopK(q init,D, K)
7:fort= 1, . . . , Tdo
8:Sample actiona t ∼π θ(· |h t,D <t)
9:ifa t =RETRIEVE(q t)then
10:D t ←TopK(q t,D, K); append to context
11:else
12:Executea t in environment; observeo t+1, renv
t
13:end if
14:end for
15:Record trajectoryτ (i)
16:end for
17:Construct paired branches via Algorithm 2
18:Compute{R traj
i }G
i=1 and group-normalized advantages{A i}G
i=1
19:end for
20:Updateπ θ via GRPO objectiveJ PROACTRL (θ)▷Eq. 11
21:Extract typed entries from completed trajectories; updateD▷Appendix C.3
22:end for
Interaction protocol.During each rollout, the agent processes the task prompt augmented with an initial retrieval
context D0 drawn from D. At each subsequent step, the policy produces either an environment action or a retrieval
action RETRIEVE(q t). When a retrieval action is triggered, the experience base returns a type-balanced set of entries
Dt (Equation 4 in Section 3.2), which is appended to the agent’s context before the next decision. The policy treats
retrieval as a regular action within the augmented action space A=A env ∪ Aret, requiring no separate gating module
or confidence threshold.
Experience update protocol.After each training iteration, completed trajectories are processed by the extraction
model (Appendix C.3) to produce typed entries. Factual and episodic memories are extracted from individual trajectories,
success and failure skills are distilled from outcome-specific subsets, and comparative skills are generated from paired
branches produced by Algorithm 2. All new entries are deduplicated against the existing repository before insertion.
Priority scores of retrieved entries associated with successful trajectories are incremented, progressively surfacing
high-utility experience.
15
