title: Ask Only When Needed: Proactive Retrieval from Memory and Skills for Experience-Driven Lifelong Agents
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: ask-only-when-needed-proactive-retrieval-from-memory-and-skills-for-experience-driven-lifelong-agents
authors: Yuxuan Cai; Jie Zhou; Qin Chen; Liang He
page: 3
section: 12
chunk: 39
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20572v1

ex.Embeddings are L2-normalized and stored in a FAISS inner-product index, which is equivalent to
cosine similarity search over normalized vectors.
16

ICALK@ECNU
• Scoring.Given a query qt, each candidate entry r is scored as score(qt, r) = sim(e(qt), e(r)) +λ p p(r), combining
semantic similarity with the priority term (Section 3.2).
• Type-balanced retrieval.The retrieval budget K is divided equally across the five entry types, with one slot allocated
to each by default. This prevents any single type from dominating the returned context and encourages complementary
evidence.
• Priority update.Only entries that are actually retrieved during a trajectory receive priority updates. Specifically,
when a trajectory succeeds, the priority of each retrieved entry is incremented by one. Entries that are stored but never
retrieved receive no update. This mechanism progressively surfaces high-utility entries without requiring explicit
supervision.
• Deduplication.Exact-match deduplication on the when_to_use field is enabled by default. The current implementation does not impose a fixed repository capacity cap or employ a learned eviction policy.
C.3 Entry Extraction and Maintenance
After each episode, completed trajectories are filtered to retain episodes with valid response tokens and then grouped by
task instance. Within each group, a dedicated extraction model (Qwen3-32B) produces typed entries according to the
following procedure:
1. Factual and episodic memoriesare extracted from individual trajectories via summarization. The extractor
produces at most two entries of each type per trajectory, focusing on environment facts and trajectory-specific plans
or constraints.
2. Success and failure skillsare distilled from outcome-specific trajectory subsets. Each distiller returns one to three
JSON-formatted entries that encode reusable strategies (from successes) or corrective rules (from failures).
3. Comparative skillsare distilled from matched trajectory pairs. Paired A/B branches produced by PROACTRL are
prioritized because they share the same task prefix and therefore expose the most localized contrastive signal. When
such pairs are unavailable, the extractor falls back to outcome-ranked trajectory pairs from the same task group.
The complete prompts used for each extraction type are provided in Appendix E.
D Training Protocol
This section describes the full training pipeline, including the cold-start phase, the paired-branch rollout procedure,
and the retrieval annealing schedule. These stages correspond to the procedural flow outlined in Algorithm 1 and
Algorithm 2. The hyperparameters used in all experiments are summarized in Table 6.
D.1 Pipeline Overview
The training pipeline proceeds through six sequential stages:
1. Cold start.The base policy is trained via supervised learning on successful trajectories to learn the interaction
format, valid action syntax, and retrieval-tag conventions. This stage is critical for initializing the policy with
sufficient tool-calling competence before reinforcement learning begins (as confirmed by the ablation in Section 4.3).
2. Rollout sampling.Multiple rollouts are sampled for each training prompt under the current policy. A portion of
these rollouts is configured as no-retrieval trajectories through the retrieval_enabled switch, whose probability
is annealed across training phases.
3. Paired-branch construction.When paired branching is active, the system identifies retrieval-trigger steps in
retrieval-enabled rollouts, replays the corresponding prefixes, and creates matched no-retrieval branches (Section D.2).
4. Reward computation.The environment outcome is combined with the paired-branch process reward and the
efficiency bonus to produce the PROACTRL trajectory-level reward (Section 3.3).
5. Policy update.The policy is updated using GRPO-style group normalization with PPO-style clipped surrogate
optimization.
6. Experience base update.The experience base D is updated by extracting factual, episodic, success, failure, and
comparative entries from the new trajectories (Appendix C.3).
17
