title: Closing the Domain Gap in Biomedical Imaging by In-Context Control Samples
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: closing-the-domain-gap-in-biomedical-imaging-by-in-context-control-samples
authors: Ana Sanchez-Fernandez; Thomas Pinetz; Werner Zellinger; Günter Klambauer
page: 3
section: adapt-calibrate-classifier-to-your-data
chunk: 63
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20824v1

ANN)L CE (b,d v(h))R
CORAL discrepancy∥C S −C T ∥2
F R ≥0
BatchNorm (BN) statistics
test-batch mean/var (per channel, batchβ)µ BN ,σ BN R D ,R D
>0
16

Closing the Domain Gap in Biomedical Imaging by In-Context Control Samples
B. Training details
In our experiments, we used either Nvidia A40 or A100 GPUs and all experiments use a single GPU. When reporting results,
for the new experimental batch evaluation (experiment 5.1) and for the in-domain evaluation of source 3 (S3→S3 in Table
2), we perform 5-fold cross-validation and report the mean and standard deviation across folds. For the in-domain evaluation
of source 8 (S8→S8), due to computational constrains, we perform re-runs in two different random splits.
For all methods, in Experiments 5.1 and 5.3 we set a maximum number of training epochs to 400 and implement an early
stopping strategy, setting the patience to 80 epochs, so that if the validation loss does not decrease with respect to the current
minimum loss for 80 epochs, the training is stopped. In Experiments 5.2 and 5.4, due to computational constraints, we
set we set a maximum number of training epochs to 200 and a patience of 20. In all experiments, the checkpoint used
for evaluating the test set is the one that achieved the lowest validation loss. By default, we use a ResNet50 as a feature
encoder. As an optimizer, unless otherwise stated, we use Adam and the selected learning rate is decreased using a cosine
annealing scheduler. The hyperparameters were manually tuned, and the exploration space for each method can be found in
Supplementary Table A5
For the methods based in the CA-MAE foundation model, linear probing is performed, so that the weights of the feature
encoder are frozen and only the classifier, which consists in one linear layer, is trained. The pretrained weights of this model
are the weights of a ViT-S/16, provided in HuggingFace by Kraus et al. (2024), trained with the RxRx3 dataset and subsets
of the JUMP-CP with samples treated for gene knockout and overexpression.
In the style transfer baseline, as the images were generated using a pre-trained diffusion model, the input for the feature
extractor consisted in 3 channels instead of 5. Moreover, for computational efficiency, the images were generated with a
resolution of 256x256.
For performing the TVN correction, control images from the corresponding matching plate of each perturbed sample are
used for centering and whitening.
C. Dataset details
As explained in Section 5, the experiments were carried out on the JUMP-CP dataset, using source 3 and source 8. The
classification task consists in classifying the MoA of the given image, similar to Haslum et al. (2023). As we need images
that are correctly annotated, we use images that were treated with compounds that have a clear and well-defined MoA.
Specifically, we use the images treated with the compounds used as positive controls, which are all present in every plate.
The name of these compounds, along with their mechanism of action can be found in Supplementary Table A6. Source 3
contains 9 experimental batches and consists of 49,491 microscopy images (with 5 channels each) and 172 different plates.
Source 8 contains 4 experimental batches and 56,160 microscopy images (with 5 channels each) and 195 different plates. For
experiments with the CellProfiler features, we download the provided images in https://registry.opendata.aws/cellpaintinggallery/, and perform standardization by using the training features. We use these features as provided, and they were
calculated on a well-level basis, so that this is the only baseline where accuracy is evaluated on a well level.
Preprocessing.As a preprocessing step, the images were downsized to a resolution of 512x512 and we performed
illumination correction by clipping 0.01% of the brightest pixels. During training, the images were further resized to
256x256 and random vertical and horizontal flipping was performed. Moreover, in all methods, except for the baseline with
instance norm and the MAE-based methods, the images were normalized using the mean and standard deviation calculated
for the training split. In the remaining methods, the images are preprocessed by normalizing the channel of each image
individually, in order to match the pretraining procedure in the case of the CA-MAE baselines (Kraus et al., 2024).
For the TVN correction, additional negative controls, i.e. samples in which only DMSO was applied, were used. In total, the
negative controls present in the 172 plates from the dataset described above, consist of 49,536 images.
17
