title: A Guide To PIC Microcontroller Documentation
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: a-guide-to-pic-microcontroller-documentation
authors: 
page: 5
section: documentation-structure-dev-tools-manufacturing
chunk: 31
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/A_Guide_To_PIC_Microcontroller_Documentation

ructions are programmed into the flash. There are four potential methods, all serial based, for programming the flash memory of a PIC microcontroller.

ICSP™ - in-circuit serial programming is the standard interface for flash programming. Using two of the controllers GPIO pins (one as a clock and another as a bi-directional data line) as a communications interface the desired instructions are transferred to the controller and programmed into the flash using a specially defined protocol. The protocol is specific to one family of microcontrollers due to the different memory widths of the flash of each family. The programming mode is entered by holding the clock and data lines low (typically named PGC and PGD) and applying a high voltage on the MCLR/VPP pin, with a "high voltage" being somewhere in the range 8.0V to 13.5V for 8-bit products and the supply voltage (VDD) for 16 and 32-bit products. The exact voltage is specified in the "Programming Specification" documentation. Once in programming mode the microcontroller's flash memory can be written and read until programming mode is left by removing the high-voltage from the MCLR/VPP pins upon completion of the last programming command. ICSP™ is available on all flash-based PICs.
Low-Voltage ICSP™ - the low-voltage in-circuit programming uses the same communications interface and protocol, but does not require the high-voltage signal on the MCLR/VPP pin which can be difficult to accommodate in a design. Instead the clock and data pins must be held low while a third pin, PGM, is held high after which the MCLR/VPP pin must be pulled up to the standard operating voltage of the microcontroller. Not all microcontrollers support low-voltage ICSP™ and, if supported, the low-voltage programming bit LVP in the controllers configuration bits register must be set to '1'. If this bit is cleared to '0', the normal high-voltage ICSP™ method must be used to set this bit back to '1' again. Low-Voltage ICSP™ is available on most 8-bit products.
Enhanced ICSP™ - enhanced ICSP™ uses the same programming interface in conjunction with a programming executive (PE), a small piece of firmware, to simplify the programming process. The programming executive takes over the low-level programming procedure, allowing the programmer tool to concentrate on executing higher-level programming commands such as 'read memory' and 'blank check' which would otherwise have to be undertaken by the programming tool and possibly a host PC system. This results in faster programming times and less overhead in the programming procedure from the side of the programming tool. The PE is executed from flash in the 16-bit controllers and may or may not already be available when entering programming mode. The PE for 32-bit controllers must be downloaded into RAM after entering programming mode. Enhanced ICSP™ is available on the dsPIC30, dsPIC33, PIC24 and PIC32 families.
Enhanced JTAG - the PIC32 family is the first and only microcontroller family from Microchip which currently supports flash programming via the JTAG interface. The JTAG interface programming protocol is more or less the same as for ICSP™ on the PIC32 as the communication in both cases passes through the JTAG interface's TAP controller. Enhanced JTAG can also make use of a programming executive, in the same way as the enhanced ICSP™ previously described, if desired.
The documentation for flash programming is, unfortunately, not always the same for an entire family of microcontrollers but is instead typically common to a small collection of controllers from a family. To provide an idea of what to expect, a few example documents are listed below.
