title: A Guide To PIC Microcontroller Documentation
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: a-guide-to-pic-microcontroller-documentation
authors: 
page: 5
section: documentation-structure-dev-tools-manufacturing
chunk: 36
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/A_Guide_To_PIC_Microcontroller_Documentation

is dependent on the microcontroller family. The following provides guidance on where to look and in which documentation to find out more information:

Mid-range and Enhanced mid-range devices - self-writing of the program flash is achieved by performing writes through the EEPROM registers to erase and re-write desired locations. It is important to note that the controller cannot execute its own code as it writes its own program memory, and program execution will be stopped for a time in the order of some milliseconds. Additionally take careful note of the reference assembler code in the datasheet and a very specific sequence of code is needed to enable the erase and write process. Refer to the device's datasheet and search for a chapter which is typically named "DATA EEPROM AND FLASH PROGRAM MEMORY CONTROL".
High-performance devices - these devices use a process known as "Table Reads and Table Writes" which uses a combination of special registers and special "table write" assembly instruction to modify the content of the program flash. Like the mid-range family, the controller must wait for the write process to complete before it can continue to execute code which can take several milliseconds to complete. The code required to write memory also requires a very specific sequence and is provided in the datasheet as assembly code. Refer to the device's datasheet and search for a chapter which is typically named "FLASH PROGRAM MEMORY" and read further for a section called "Writing to Flash Program Memory" or similar.
16-bit MCU and DSC devices - although these devices use the same "Table Reads and Table Writes" process used by the high-performance 8-bit family, the self-writing capability is named Run-Time Self programming or RTSP. Like the other families, the controller must wait for the write process to complete before it can continue to execute code which can take several milliseconds to complete. The required assembly code sequence for self-programming of the flash is also very important to follow with reference code being provided in the datasheet. Refer to the device's datasheet and search for a section which is typically named "RTSP Operation" which is typically found in the "Flash Program Memory" chapter.
32-bit devices - like their 16-bit cousins, the self-writing capability of the 32-bit family is also named Run-Time Self programming or RTSP. Like the other families, the controller must wait for the write process to complete before it can continue to execute code which can take several milliseconds to complete. Refer to the device's datasheet and search for a section which is typically named "RTSP Operation" or search for the same term in the PIC32MX Family Reference Manual.
