title: CHASM: Unveiling Covert Advertisements on Chinese Social Media
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: chasm-unveiling-covert-advertisements-on-chinese-social-media
authors: Jingyi Zheng; Tianyi Hu; Yule Liu; Zhen Sun; Zongmin Zhang; Zifan Peng; Wenhan Dong; Xinlei He
page: 4
section: test-gold-questions-50
chunk: 43
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20511v1

r responsible
release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models,
image generators, or scraped datasets)?
18

Answer: [Yes]
Justification: We release our models and dataset under restricted licenses and access terms.
All released checkpoints are accompanied by usage agreements, and unsafe examples are
filtered or annotated.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks.
• Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with
necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring
that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing
safety filters.
• Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors
should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.
• We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do
not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best
faith effort.
12.Licenses for existing assets
Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in
the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and
properly respected?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: All reused datasets and models are properly cited in the main paper and
supplementary. We explicitly list versions and sources (URLs) for each reused asset.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets.
• The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.
• The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a
URL.
• The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.
• For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of
service of that source should be provided.
• If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the
package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets
has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the
license of a dataset.
• For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of
the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided.
• If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to
the asset’s creators.
13.New assets
Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation
provided alongside the assets?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: The released benchmark and model checkpoints are documented with task
definitions, collection methods, license terms, and usage limitations. Details are provided in
the main content, appendix and supplement files.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets.
• Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their
submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license,
limitations, etc.
• The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose
asset is used.
• At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either
create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.
14.Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects
Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper
include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as
well as details about compensation (if any)?
Answer: [NA]
19
