title: CHASM: Unveiling Covert Advertisements on Chinese Social Media
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: chasm-unveiling-covert-advertisements-on-chinese-social-media
authors: Jingyi Zheng; Tianyi Hu; Yule Liu; Zhen Sun; Zongmin Zhang; Zifan Peng; Wenhan Dong; Xinlei He
page: 4
section: test-gold-questions-50
chunk: 44
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20511v1

de the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as
well as details about compensation (if any)?
Answer: [NA]
19

Justification: Although our work does not involve crowdsourcing experiments or research
with human subjects in the conventional sense, we did employ human annotators for data
labeling. They were paid $5 per hour, which exceeds the local minimum wage standard.
The compensation screenshots are shown in Appendix F.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
human subjects.
• Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribution of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be
included in the main paper.
• According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation,
or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data
collector.
15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human
subjects
Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether
such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB)
approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or
institution) were obtained?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: No potential risks for human participants were involved in this research, and
no IRB or ethics review was necessary.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
human subjects.
• Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent)
may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you
should clearly state this in the paper.
• We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions
and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the
guidelines for their institution.
• For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if
applicable), such as the institution conducting the review.
16.Declaration of LLM usage
Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or
non-standard component of the core methods in this research?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: We employ LLMs as evaluation targets and for generating adversarial prompts
in several attack methods we evaluate. Their use is central to the attacks and defenses
framework and is detailed in the methodology section and Appendix.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not
involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components.
• Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM)
for what should or should not be described.
20
