title: CHASM: Unveiling Covert Advertisements on Chinese Social Media
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: chasm-unveiling-covert-advertisements-on-chinese-social-media
authors: Jingyi Zheng; Tianyi Hu; Yule Liu; Zhen Sun; Zongmin Zhang; Zifan Peng; Wenhan Dong; Xinlei He
page: 4
section: test-gold-questions-50
chunk: 50
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20511v1

es of Anonymization
F.2.1 Examples of Text Anonymization
In the examples, we masked detailed information such as detailed addresses or the website.
25

Figure 6: Example of the image anonymization
Example 1
Chinese Text: <详细地址>的某华公寓，后面就是工业园，超级吵白天晚上都吵
Translate: The Mouhua Apartment at <detailed address> is right next to an industrial park.
It’s extremely noisy both during the day and at night.
Example 2
Chinese Text:虽然，但是文件要自己命名和管理才知道是什么，在哪里。 ai代理的话
我怎么找到呢? <网址>
Translate: Although... the files need to be named and organized manually, so I know what
they are and where they are. If it’s handled by an AI agent, how would I be able to find them?
<website>
F.2.2 Examples of Image Anonymization
As shown in Figure 6, we anonymized the images, primarily by masking faces, to further protect
privacy.
G Distribution of the Dataset
This section illustrates how normal posts and covert advertisements differ in their distributions over
five key features, shown in Figure 7. The five key feature dimensions are Number of Images, Post
Text Length, Number of Comments, Average Comment Length, and Number of Tags. Blue bars
represent the count distribution of normal posts (left y-axis). Red bars represent the count distribution
of covert advertisement posts. Blue lines indicate the density of normal posts across the feature values
(right y-axis). Red lines indicate the normalized ratio of covert ads across the feature values.
Although there are some distributional differences between the two, for example, covert advertisements tend to have slightly shorter text lengths than normal posts, these statistical features are overall
quite similar and are insufficient on their own to reliably distinguish covert advertisements from
normal posts.
26
