title: 360 Assembly
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: 360-assembly
authors: 
page: 16
section: 360-instructions-bcr
chunk: 60
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/360_Assembly

s - BCR 8,14
47E5 BNO 5 branch on not ones - BCR 14,5

== Availability ==
The BCR instruction is available on all models of the 360, 370 and z/System.

== Operation ==
Upon performing an arithmetic operation or a comparison, certain bits in the Program Status Word called the Condition Code are set or cleared. In the case of comparison of two fields, the left value is considered the "A" value, and the right value is considered the "B" value, and the result of the comparison of A to B tests how A compares to B, either low, high, equal or not-equal.
In the case of an arithmetic operation, the result being plus, minus, zero or having had an overflow is tested.
In the case of the test under mask instructions, the result of the test being all ones, all zeroes, or mixed ones and zeroes.
The unconditional branch (BCR 15,base_register) is the equivalent of a return statement or other exit from a procedure or function to the calling procedure or program in a high-level language.
The Branch on Condition Register instruction is used following such a test to compare the condition code bits to the mask value. If bits set in the mask match bits which are set in the condition code (or all of the bits in the mask are set), and the base register of the target address is not 0, the target address contained in the base register is placed into the PSW as the new address of the current instruction and the branch is taken. Otherwise execution continues with the next instruction following the branch on condition register instruction.
Typically, the Branch on Condition Register instruction is most often used in module to module transfers or branch from one CSECT to another. In the case of a conditional branch being used within the same module or CSECT, the Branch on Condition (BC) instruction (or the optional formats, BE, BNE etc.) is more often used.
