title: pAI/MSc: ML Theory Research with Humans on the Loop
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: pai-msc-ml-theory-research-with-humans-on-the-loop
authors: Mahmoud Abdelmoneum; Pierfrancesco Beneventano; Tomaso Poggio
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 40
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20622v1

AlphaEvolve [70] and Mathematical Exploration at
Scale[71]targetalgorithmicandmathematicaldiscovery; andDeepInnovator[72]trainsmodelsforinnovative
14

The system can guarantee The system cannot guarantee
Deterministic execution topology: same
stages, same routing logic, same loopback
structure
Deterministic outputs: two runs with the same
task may diverge in content
Artifact-complete workspace: all required
files produced and structurally valid
Scientifically correct workspace: claims may
contain errors, gaps, or undetected prior art
Explicit validation gates: hard blockers,
review thresholds, editorial checks
Calibrated quality scores: internal reviewer
scores are routing heuristics, not
acceptance-probability estimates
Budget tracking and cost visibility via
ledger files
Exact cost prediction: actual provider bills may
differ from estimates
Resumable, checkpointed execution with
stage-level restart
Idempotent restart: resumed runs may produce
different outputs from fresh runs
Human steering surfaces at multiple points
in the pipeline
Reduced need for human scientific judgment:
novelty, correctness, and citation faithfulness
remain human obligations
Table 3: Guarantees and non-guarantees of the currentpAI/MScrelease. The central distinction is between structural/operational properties (left) and scientific properties (right).
idea generation. On the platform side, ClawdLab and Beach.Science [73] introduce governance, auditability,
and decentralized coordination for scientific-agent ecosystems. These systems enlarge the meaning of research
automation, but many optimize for open-ended discovery or ecosystem flexibility rather than a governed
paper-facing workflow.
Positioning. pAI/MScis closest in spirit to manuscript-first, end-to-end systems, but differs in emphasis. Relative to writing assistants, it covers more of the research lifecycle. Relative to autonomous discovery
systems, it places more weight on explicit intermediate artifacts, theory–experiment coordination, and validation gates tied to manuscript production. Relative to dynamic or decentralized platforms, it favors a
tightly governed research-to-paper path designed for human-steerable execution in machine learning theory
and adjacent quantitative workflows. It should be read not as a general theory of autonomous science, but
as an artifact-driven technical contribution to the research-to-paper segment of that broader landscape.
6 Limitations and Honest Assessment
6.1 What the system guarantees and what it does not
The most important distinction in this report is betweenstructuralandscientificsuccess. The system’s
guarantees are structural and operational; its non-guarantees are scientific and epistemic. Table 3 makes
this boundary explicit.
6.2 What is surprisingly automatable
One of the most interesting lessons is thatresearch structuringis more automatable than one might expect.
The system can turn a high-level task into a staged workspace with literature synthesis, a research plan, a
theory–experiment decomposition, follow-up decisions, and a draft manuscript. Even when the final science
requires human scrutiny, this intermediate structuring is already valuable.
A second surprisingly automatable layer ispaper-adjacent discipline: proofreading, reviewer-style critique,
copyediting traces, claim-traceability files, resource inventories, and revision logs. These are tedious but
15
