title: pAI/MSc: ML Theory Research with Humans on the Loop
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: pai-msc-ml-theory-research-with-humans-on-the-loop
authors: Mahmoud Abdelmoneum; Pierfrancesco Beneventano; Tomaso Poggio
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 51
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20622v1

. The mathematical path is treated as a workspace with claims, dependencies, and verification traces rather than as one long free-form proof draft.
25

These agents provide structure for theorem-oriented work and for integrating accepted claims into the paper,
but they do not establish mathematical truth by oracle. The rigorous and empirical verifiers are supportive
checks, not substitutes for expert proof review.
A.4 Experiment track details
When empirical work is selected, the graph runsexperiment_literature_agent,experiment_
design_agent,experimentation_agent,experiment_verification_agent, andexperiment_
transcription_agent.
This path writes its own workspace:experiment_literature.md,experiment_baselines.json,
experiment_design.json,experiment_rationale.md,execution_log.json,verification_report.md,
andverification_results.json. When experiment transcription runs, the paper workspace additionally
receivesexperiment_report.texandexperiment_report.pdf.
Experiment execution is delegated to an external execution layer. In the current release this includes AIScientist-v2 integration and optional SLURM submission. Verification occursafterexecution and serves as
a post-hoc assessment, not a pre-execution code safety guarantee.
A.5 Counsel protocol specification
When–enable-counselis active, selected specialist stages become a multi-model protocol with sandboxing,
debate, synthesis, and artifact promotion.
Model pool.In the default configuration, the debate pool includes Anthropic Claude Opus 4.6, OpenAI
GPT-5.4, and Google Gemini 3 Pro Preview, with Claude Sonnet 4.6 as the synthesis model. These choices
are configurable through the model configuration file.
Protocol.Each model first works in an isolated sandbox copy of the workspace, producing an independent
candidateoutput. Modelsthencritiquethecandidatesolutionsoverseveraldebaterounds. Asynthesismodel
selects and promotes a single authoritative output back to the main workspace.
Target stages.Counsel targets stages where disagreement is informative: literature review, experiment
design, and manuscript writing.
Cost profile.Counsel increases per-stage cost substantially but changes the failure mode from “one
model silently committed to one line of reasoning” to “multiple models exposed and critiqued alternative
drafts before promotion.”
A.6 Tree search algorithm
When–enable-tree-searchis active, thelinear proof stagein thetheory trackis replacedbyaDAG-layered
best-first controller that explores multiple proof strategies in parallel.
Algorithm.
1. Frontier claims are selected from the claim graph.
26
