title: pAI/MSc: ML Theory Research with Humans on the Loop
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: pai-msc-ml-theory-research-with-humans-on-the-loop
authors: Mahmoud Abdelmoneum; Pierfrancesco Beneventano; Tomaso Poggio
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 55
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20622v1

s hypotheses, produces analyses and code,
and then writes a human-verifiable manuscript with explicit backward traceability from claims to executed
29

steps. The main affinity withpAI/MScis therefore not simply “end-to-end research,” but the insistence that
a manuscript should be supported by inspectable intermediate artifacts rather than by polished prose alone.
A second cluster emphasizes broader autonomous pipeline coverage. The AI Scientist [60] popularized the
idea of a repeated loop in which a system generates research ideas, writes code, runs experiments, drafts a
full paper, and then critiques its own output through a reviewer-style stage. AI Scientist-v2 [61] extends this
exploration-first pattern through agentic tree search and stronger workshop-level paper generation. Agent
Laboratory [62] structures the workflow into literature review, experimentation, and report writing, while
explicitly showing that human feedback at stage boundaries materially improves outcomes. AI-Researcher
[64]framesautonomousscientificinnovationitselfasthecoretask, andCycleResearcher[63]explicitlycouples
automated generation to automated review in a revision loop. AgentRxiv [65] adds a collaborative preprintserver abstraction on top of these laboratory-style agents, enabling cross-run accumulation and retrieval of
prior reports rather than treating every run as an isolated research episode.
freephdlabor [66] is especially relevant because it departs from rigid fixed pipelines and instead argues
for highly customizable, fully dynamic workflows determined by real-time agent reasoning. It is therefore
much closer than earlier systems to a “research operating system” for multi-agent science. Relative to
freephdlabor, however,pAI/MScintentionally remains more constrained: our emphasis is not maximum
architectural freedom, but a tighter artifact contract, clearer theory–experiment coupling, and stronger
paper-facing validation gates.
Taken together, these systems establish the manuscript-first research-agent frontier into whichpAI/MSc
enters. Our system is closest to this family in artifact contract, but it differs in emphasis. Relative to
exploration-first systems, we place more weight on bounded workflow control, explicit intermediate artifacts,
and the coordination of theory and experiments under a single paper trajectory. Relative to more datafirst systems, we begin from a human-specified hypothesis and support both mathematical and empirical
development of that idea.
B.3 Broader autonomous scientific discovery systems
A nearby but distinct literature optimizes for autonomous scientific discovery more broadly rather than for
manuscript production as the primary output. The difference matters: these systems are often stronger
on ideation, search breadth, or domain-specific discovery, yet weaker on paper-facing artifact contracts and
manuscript governance.
At one end of this spectrum is AI co-scientist. Gottweis et al. [67] describe a multi-agent system that
proposes, debates, and iteratively refines scientific hypotheses under scientist guidance, with biomedical validation examples. The center of gravity here is hypothesis generation and research reasoning, not manuscript
production. InternAgent [68] and InternAgent-1.5 [69] push further toward long-horizon, closed-loop autonomous discovery across multiple scientific domains, with architectures explicitly organized around generation, verification, and evolution. DeepInnovator [72] addresses a different bottleneck still: not orchestration
of the full pipeline, but training models for innovative idea generation through structured research memories and iterative next-idea prediction. In mathematics and algorithmic discovery, AlphaEvolve [70] uses
evaluator-guided coding agents for scientific and algorithmic discovery, while Mathematical Exploration and
Discovery at Scale [71] studies large-scale machine-assisted mathematical exploration more directly.
These systems are important to our positioning because they enlarge the meaning of “research automation.”
They suggest that the space is not exhausted by paper-writing systems, and that one can build powerful
discovery engines without centering the final manuscript artifact.pAI/MSc, by contrast, is not intended
as a general theory of autonomous scientific discovery. It is narrower: a system whose organizing question
is how far one can push a hypothesis-to-paper workflow while keeping human steering sparse and scientific
artifacts explicit.
30
