title: pAI/MSc: ML Theory Research with Humans on the Loop
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: pai-msc-ml-theory-research-with-humans-on-the-loop
authors: Mahmoud Abdelmoneum; Pierfrancesco Beneventano; Tomaso Poggio
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 56
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20622v1

e organizing question
is how far one can push a hypothesis-to-paper workflow while keeping human steering sparse and scientific
artifacts explicit.
30

B.4 Open multi-agent scientific platforms and decentralized research commons
A newer line of work moves away from both bounded single-run pipelines and monolithic laboratory agents
toward persistent, open, multi-agent scientific ecosystems. The most important reference here is the OpenClaw/MoltbookecosystemanalyzedbyWeideneretal.[73]. OpenClawitselfisnotamanuscript-firstresearch
agent in the narrow sense; its official documentation presents it as a self-hosted gateway and plugin platform
for AI agents across messaging channels and skills [79]. What makes it relevant to research automation is
that it became a substrate on top of which scientific-agent ecosystems were rapidly built.
Within that ecosystem, ClawdLab and Beach.Science instantiate two distinct architectural responses. The
ClawdLab paper of Weidener et al. [73] presents ClawdLab as a structured laboratory platform with hard role
restrictions, PI-led governance, explicit adversarial critique, and externally verifiable evidence requirements.
The public ClawdLab site [80] reinforces this emphasis through specialized roles, permanent reports, and
cryptographically auditable logs. Beach.Science, by contrast, is presented both in Weidener et al. [73] and in
the public repository [81] as an open research commons in which heterogeneous agents and humans exchange,
evaluate, and refine hypotheses in a more decentralized environment.
This platform-oriented line is important because it introduces design questions that bounded workflow papers
often understate: agent identity, governance, auditability, reward design, role restrictions, and persistent
public interaction. Relative to ClawdLab or Beach.Science,pAI/MScis deliberately less open-ended and
less ecosystem-oriented. It is designed as a governed research-to-paper pipeline rather than as a generalpurpose research commons. But these platforms are still highly relevant because they reveal what breaks
when one relaxes workflow constraints, and because they show that future scientific-agent systems may need
governance and auditability mechanisms that exceed what isolated pipeline papers currently provide.
B.5 Verification substrates for machine learning theory and applied mathematics
BecausepAI/MScis built with a current emphasis on machine learning theory and adjacent quantitative
fields, it should also be positioned relative to work on formal mathematical verification, not only relative to
manuscript agents. Quantitative disciplines differ from many applied domains in that they sometimes admit
verification loops much stronger than human critique alone.
LeanDojo [82] is a central enabling platform in this regard: it turns Lean repositories into programmatically
accessible training and evaluation environments for theorem proving, with structured proof states, premises,
and proof traces. miniF2F [83] provides a cross-system benchmark for Olympiad-style formal mathematics,
allowing direct comparison of theorem provers across formal systems. At a more public frontier, AlphaGeometry [84] demonstrated that synthetic-data-driven neuro-symbolic reasoning can reach olympiad-level
geometry performance, and AlphaProof [85] brought reinforcement-learning-based formal reasoning into the
IMO setting through Lean-verified proofs.
These systems are not research-to-paper agents in the ordinary sense. However, they are directly relevant
to theorem-heavy workflows because they illustrate a stronger class of verification loop: when full or partial
formalization is feasible, the most meaningful verifier is not another critic agent but a compiler-like checker.
This is one reasonpAI/MSctreats theorem-oriented reasoning as an optional rigor-enhancing extension
rather than as a cosmetic extra.
B.6 Evaluation context: capability benchmarks versus manuscript benchmarks
Finally, several recent benchmarks matter for positioning capability claims, even though they are not
manuscript-quality benchmarks. GAIA [86] evaluates general AI assistants on real-world, tool-using tasks.
GPQA [87] probes graduate-level “Google-proof” scientific question answering. Humanity’s Last Exam [88]
31
