title: pAI/MSc: ML Theory Research with Humans on the Loop
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: pai-msc-ml-theory-research-with-humans-on-the-loop
authors: Mahmoud Abdelmoneum; Pierfrancesco Beneventano; Tomaso Poggio
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 58
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20622v1

s where the operator
accepts these risks and uses Docker or SLURM when appropriate, but it should not be described as a
hardened execution sandbox.
32

C.3 Submission checklist
Before submitting anypAI/MSc-produced manuscript to a venue (NeurIPS, ICML, ICLR, or similar), a
human owner should at minimum:
1. Verify novelty and related-work positioning against recent proceedings, not only arXiv.
2. Confirm that baselines are appropriate, figures are not misleading, and at least one key experiment
has been rerun independently.
3. Spot-check citations and bibliography entries, including retraction status and faithfulness of attributed
claims.
4. Manually revise high-stakes sections: abstract, ethics or broader-impact discussion, and venue-specific
formatting or anonymization details.
5. Compile the manuscript locally and obtain at least one domain-expert read before submission.
6. Check venue-specific requirements: page limits, supplementary material format, code-availability statements, and reproducibility checklists.
This checklist is part of the scientific boundary of the system.pAI/MScreduces orchestration burden but
does not remove the need for expert ownership of the final claims.
D Evaluation Framework
This appendix specifies the evaluation structure forpAI/MSc: the core evaluation questions, the metrics
taxonomy, and the known failure modes. The current release should be evaluated primarily as aworkflow
and artifact system, not as a benchmarked scientific autopilot.
D.1 Evaluation questions
For the present release, the central evaluation questions are:
•Q1 – Structural completion.Does the system reliably execute the fixed workflow graph and
materialize the required stage artifacts under different operating modes?
•Q2 – Editorial completion.Under stricter settings, does the run reach a paper-facing state in which
the manuscript artifacts, review artifacts, and optional PDF outputs are all present and structurally
valid?
•Q3 – Auditability.Do the emitted files make it possible for a human supervisor to understand
what the system planned, what it executed, what it decided to follow up on, and where additional
verification is still required?
•Q4 – Operational efficiency.What runtime and spend envelopes are induced by the major execution
modes, and how do optional modules such as counsel and tree search change that profile?
•Q5 – Scientific quality.Which aspects of output quality can already be instrumented automatically,
and which still require external auditing, reruns, or expert review?
These questions deliberately separateoperational success(Q1–Q4, already measurable from run outputs)
fromscientific success(Q5, only partially observable in the current release).
33
