title: An explicit operator explains end-to-end computation in the modern neural networks used for sequence and language modeling
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: an-explicit-operator-explains-end-to-end-computation-in-the-modern-neural-networks-used-for-sequence-and-language-modeling
authors: Anif N. Shikder; Ramit Dey; Sayantan Auddy; Luisa Liboni; Alexandra N. Busch; Arthur Powanwe; Ján Mináč; Roberto C. Budzinski; Lyle E. Muller
page: 1
section: mathematical-background
chunk: 4
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20595v1

eKteiψ(0)

(4)
whereψ(0)∈C N are the initial conditions in terms of
theψ-coordinate, and scalar functions (here Arg, log,
and modulus) are taken elementwise when applied to a
vector.
Finally, we can utilize the exact solution Eq. (3) to
propagate the recurrent dynamics in terms of thexcoordinate in discrete steps of timeτ k:
xk =e Kτ kxk−1 .(5)
The matrix exponential serves as an exact propagator
to bring the continuous-time dynamics from time point
τ(k−1) toτ k. We can then use the exact solution in
Eq. (5) to define a dynamics operatorD τ =e Kτ that
propagates the state of the network forward in time. The
operatorD τ is applied at discrete timek−1 to evolve
the state of the network to discrete timek. In terms of
this operator, we can write Eq. (5) asx k =D τ xk−1.
Intuition from the theory of coupled oscillators becomes useful at this point: across a range of phase lags,
Figure 1.The nonlinear oscillator network produces
rich spatiotemporal dynamics across its ring topology. (a)The network is composed ofNnodes arranged
on a one-dimensional ring (left), resulting in a network adjacency matrix with connections between nodes in a neighborhood ofnsteps on the ring with boundaries conditions
(right).(b)For specific combinations of network connectivity
and phase-lags, traveling waves emerge in the phase dynamics (Arg(x j(t))∀j), here plotted in color-code as a function
of node position and time.(c)Different spatiotemporal patterns are possible: a localized pocket of synchronization that
co-exist with asynchronous behavior, known as a “chimera”
state [16, 19], emerges in the phase dynamics of the network
with homogeneous phase lag.
