title: An explicit operator explains end-to-end computation in the modern neural networks used for sequence and language modeling
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: an-explicit-operator-explains-end-to-end-computation-in-the-modern-neural-networks-used-for-sequence-and-language-modeling
authors: Anif N. Shikder; Ramit Dey; Sayantan Auddy; Luisa Liboni; Alexandra N. Busch; Arthur Powanwe; J├Īn Min├Ī─Ź; Roberto C. Budzinski; Lyle E. Muller
page: 1
section: mathematical-background
chunk: 5
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20595v1

hat
co-exist with asynchronous behavior, known as a ŌĆ£chimeraŌĆØ
state [16, 19], emerges in the phase dynamics of the network
with homogeneous phase lag.

3
the network exhibits long transients, rich spatiotemporal dynamics, and signatures of spatiotemporal chaos
(Fig. 1). The rich spatiotemporal dynamics in the phase
of this system (Fig. 1b,c) are in fact the result of complexlinear dynamics viewed through the lens of a nonlinear readout, since the phase Arg(x j(t))ŌłĆjis a nonlinear function applied to each element of the statex(t).
This system, with complex-linear dynamics and a nonlinear readout, has recently been found to allow a range
of computations ŌĆō from logic gates, short-term memory,
and message encryption [16] to simple computer vision
tasks like image segmentation [20], while also being exactly mathematically interpretable. Finally, an input to
this network is straightforward to incorporate into this
framework:
xk =D Žä xkŌłÆ1 + ┬»Buk (6)
where ┬»B= (ŌłåK) ŌłÆ1(eKŌłå ŌłÆI)ŌłåBis the discrete-time
input projection to the system andu k is an input vector
(e.g. following an encoder block) at time pointk.
The operatorD Žä can be diagonalized numerically, in
general. In addition, many connection patterns inKadmit fully analytical forms for diagonalizingD Žä. For example, if the strength of connections from nodeito other
nodesjfalls off with distance (e.g. with a power law), and
the same connection rule is applied to each nodei, then
the adjacency matrix defining this network will be circulant. A circulant matrix is constructed by cyclically
permuting a generating vectorcNtimes, resulting in an
N├ŚNmatrix. The Circulant Diagonalization Theorem
(CDT) states that all circulants are diagonalized by the
same unitary matrixF, with entriesf ij [21]:
fij = 1ŌłÜ
N
exp

ŌłÆ2ŽĆi
N (iŌłÆ1)(jŌłÆ1)

,(7)
and there is a similar closed-form expression for the
eigenvalues in terms of the generating vectorc(see Appendix I A). Applying the change of basisF ŌĆĀ to Eq. (6)
then results in:
╦£xk =e ╬øŽä ╦£xkŌłÆ1 + ╦£Buk,(8)
where ╦£xk =F ŌĆĀxk,╬øis a diagonal matrix containing
the eigenvalues╬╗ s ofK(see Appendix I A), and ╦£B=
F ŌĆĀ ┬»B. As demonstrated in the next section, Eq. (8) allows
revealing a precise correspondence with a family of linear
time-invariant SSMs used in sequence processing.
