title: Render-in-the-Loop: Vector Graphics Generation via Visual Self-Feedback
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: render-in-the-loop-vector-graphics-generation-via-visual-self-feedback
authors: Guotao Liang; Zhangcheng Wang; Juncheng Hu; Haitao Zhou; Ziteng Xue; Jing Zhang; Dong Xu; Qian Yu
page: 5
section: technical-constraints
chunk: 8
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20730v1

mples. It leverages large
multimodal transformers to generate complex vector graphics and demonstrates
strong scalability with large training corpora.

20 G. Liang et al.
Reinforcement Learning-based Methods.SVGen[39] introduces reinforcement
learning for SVG generation by optimizing the generation policy using the Group
Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) [11] algorithm. The method aims to improve the alignment between generated SVG outputs and evaluation metrics
through policy optimization. As one of the first RL-based approaches for SVG
generation, it provides an important baseline for evaluating reinforcement learning strategies in vector graphics synthesis.
Unless otherwise specified, we use the official implementations of these baselines and follow the hyperparameters recommended in their original papers.
C Comparison with LIVE and DiffVG
While optimization-based vectorization methods such as LIVE [24] and DiffVG [20] can achieve high visual fidelity through gradient descent, their resulting SVG representations often lack human-interpretable structure and logical
layering.
As demonstrated in Fig. S4, these methods typically generate a massive number of redundant paths and messy overlapping layers to merely fit the target
image pixels. This “stroke-stacking” behavior leads to bloated SVG files that are
difficult for human designers to edit, animate, or reuse. In contrast, our proposed
Render-in-the-Loopframework leverages the semantic prior of Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs) to generate clean, geometrically logical, and
highly editable vector graphics that align with human drawing habits.
D MMSVGBench
We evaluate our method on MMSVGBench [56], a benchmark proposed by OmniSVG [56] for evaluating multimodal SVG generation models. The benchmark
contains 600 synthetic samples covering two tasks: text-to-SVG and image-toSVG. Each task contains 300 evaluation samples, further divided into icon-level
and illustration-level complexity.
To ensure fair evaluation and avoid training data leakage, all prompts and
images in MMSVGBench are generated from scratch using GPT [1] models.
Therefore, the benchmark samples are guaranteed to be unseen during model
training.
Each benchmark sample contains the input modality (text or image), task
type, semantic category (icon or illustration), and metadata such as the source
URL. Following the protocol of OmniSVG, we report FID, CLIP score, Aesthetic
score and HPS for text-to-SVG tasks, and DINO similarity, SSIM, LPIPS, and
MSE for image-to-SVG tasks.
References
1. Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., Aleman, F.L., Almeida,
D., Altenschmidt, J., Altman, S., Anadkat, S., et al.: Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.08774 (2023)
