title: From Image to Music Language: A Two-Stage Structure Decoding Approach for Complex Polyphonic OMR
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: from-image-to-music-language-a-two-stage-structure-decoding-approach-for-complex-polyphonic-omr
authors: Nan Xu; Shiheng Li; Shengchao Hou
page: 1
section: paraff
chunk: 17
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20522v1

t PASSnode, then repeatedly descends
from the root until the quota is exhausted, the tree is fully explored, or a sufficiently low loss is
reached.
33

Algorithm 2 :SOLVECLUSTER(C,picker, Q, s stop, λ)
Input: clusterC, BeadPicker, quotaQ, stop-losss stop, ptFactorλ
Output: best ClusterEvaluation found; cluster state updated in place
e0.order←0; all other orders←∅
s0 ←PREDICTCLUSTER(C,tip= 1)// single forward pass to seed root
root←new Pass node withp=s 0,pt= 0
L∗ ← ∞;S ∗ ←∅
whileQ >0androot.count<∞:
reset:e 0.order←0, all others←∅// restore start state before each path
eval←DEDUCE(root,ctx);Q←Q−1
ifeval.L<L ∗:
L∗ ←eval.L;S ∗ ←SAVESTATE(C)
ifL ∗ ≤s stop:break// solution good enough
RESTORESTATE(C, S ∗)
// Post-process residue elements: snap tick to nearest fixed event or grid
// Assign beam, stemDirection, grace, timeWarp from predispositions
// BuildH(horizontal adjacency matrix for layout engine)
Each call to DEDUCEmay itself call PREDICTCLUSTERonce at each new Pass node it creates. The
quota Q is therefore a budget on the total number of model inference calls, not on the number of
tree nodes. The root node’s accessCount counts how many times the root has been visited; when
it reaches ∞ (all branches sealed), the tree is fully explored and the loop terminates regardless of
remaining quota.
B.6 Measure-Level Assembly
SOLVEMEASUREis the top-level entry point. It splits the measure into clusters (one per staff group),
calls SOLVECLUSTERon each, and assembles the voice structure.
The per-cluster quota is Q= min(⌈n·f⌉, Q max) where n is the cluster event count, f is
quotaFactor, andQ max = 1000.
After all clusters are solved, voices are extracted by iterating events in order-ascending sequence:
consecutive events (order gap exactly 1) belong to the same voice; a gap larger than 1 begins a new
voice. Events flagged grace or fullMeasure are excluded from voice sequences but receive ticks
from the spatially nearest in-voice event.
The horizontal adjacency matrix H (Hij = 1 iff event j immediately precedes i in its voice) is
constructed and returned as part of the RegulationSolution, which is applied to the measure to
populate all fields needed for rendering and export.
C Failure Cases
This appendix documents four representative measures where successive regulation strategies fail,
illustrating the performance boundary of each method. For each entry the left panel shows the original
sheet music; the centre panel shows the failing strategy’s output; the right panel shows the next
stronger strategy (or human annotation) that succeeds. In the topology panels, distinct colours identify
distinct voices; the narrow timeline strip at the bottom encodes each voice’s tick allocation within the
measure. Measures were selected to form a difficulty ladder: each row’s failure case is too hard for
all previous strategies and is solved by the next.
Row 1. Greedy → Equations (rule-based).Bach,BWV791, m. 6. A greedy, myopic voice
assignment produces six fragmented voices and a quality score of zero. The linear-equation
solver re-links the fragments correctly, yielding three voices withq= 0.959.
Row 2. Equations → BeadSolver (single-pass).Chopin,ÉtudeOp. 10 No. 3, m. 34. The constraint
system cannot resolve voice crossings in denser polyphony and again produces an error
34
