title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 5
section: introduction
chunk: 106
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

iews that check compliance to project standards.
Some general issues concerning the management of Ada projects are discussed by Hefley, et al. (1992).

=== To Contracting Agencies And Standards Organizations ===
Many of the guidelines presented here are specific enough to be adopted as corporate or project programming standards. Others require a managerial decision on a particular instantiation before they can be used as standards. In such cases, a sample instantiation is presented and used throughout the examples. Such instantiations should be recognized as weaker recommendations than the guidelines themselves. In some cases, where the examples are extracted from a published work, the author's style is used unchanged.
Other guidelines presented in this book are intentionally phrased in terms of design choices to consider. These guidelines cannot be instantiated as hard-and-fast rules that a project must follow. For example, you should not interpret Guidelines 6.1.1 and 6.1.2 to mean that a project is forbidden to use tasks. Rather, these guidelines are intended to help the designer make the tradeoffs between using protected objects and tasks, thus leading the designer to make a more informed choice between these features.
The guidelines in this document are not intended to stand alone as a standard. In some cases, it is not clear that a guideline could be enforced because it is only intended to make the engineer aware of tradeoffs. In other cases, a choice still remains about a guideline, such as how many spaces to use for each level of indentation.
When a guideline is too general to show an example, the "instantiation" section of each guideline contains more specific guidelines. These instantiations can be considered a standard and are more likely to be enforceable. Any organization that attempts to extract standards from this document needs to evaluate the complete context. Each guideline works best when related guidelines are practiced. In isolation, a guideline may have little or no benefit.
