title: A Neutral Look at Operating Systems
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: a-neutral-look-at-operating-systems
authors: 
page: 8
section: linux
chunk: 28
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/A_Neutral_Look_at_Operating_Systems

extensive timeline graphic for currently functioning distributions and also for those which are no longer active can be found here: futurist.se/gldt.

== Linux® ==
Linux is the leading UNIX clone. The system generally consists of the Linux Kernel, User interface, development tools, Office Software and other utilities.
Linux consists of Open Source software. This means users have the right to receive the source code of the operating system. They are also free to study, modify and redistribute the source code. The GNU Public License is used for about 2/3 of a typical Linux system.
Linux is a result of sustained effort of a huge community of programmers all over the world. Many of them are volunteers working on various projects in their free time. A number of companies also pay developers to work on the software. Linux is available in a variety of different distributions (flavors) including Ubuntu, Redhat, Slackware, Gentoo, SUSE, Mandriva and Debian.
One of the keys to the success of Linux is its open development model. This allows the users to contribute to improving the Operating System. The code submitted by individual developers undergoes a rigorous peer review process. This allows only high quality code into the OS. This review process weeds out bugs and security holes. The huge community of programmers (about a million) are able to fix bugs very quickly. Because of this, Linux is considered a very secure and high quality OS.
Linux is easily the most versatile operating system in the world. In addition to desktop computers, Linux is used in tiny "embedded devices". Archived from the original on 2012-12-09., all sorts of network equipment, large servers and even in super computers. In all these environments Linux provides robust performance, powerful networking, and a high degree of reliability. Linux is in general considered more secure than the Windows alternatives. Viruses, worms, trojans etc. are not as prevalent in Linux environments. This is because of a secure design which does not allow any single user/virus to disrupt the whole system. All normal Linux distributions come with solid firewall abilities. Users generally don't have to install anti-virus software.
