title: A Guide To PIC Microcontroller Documentation
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: a-guide-to-pic-microcontroller-documentation
authors: 
page: 4
section: documentation-structure
chunk: 11
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/A_Guide_To_PIC_Microcontroller_Documentation

of this document may be available for download as well as the entire document.
Other documents that can be downloaded on an "as needs" basis include:

Programmer's Reference Manual - for the 16-bit devices there is an additional document called a "Programmer's Reference Manual". Within its pages are a detailed description of the 16-bit architecture as well as information on the DSP side of the dsPIC products. The instruction set is also covered in some detail.
Application Notes - describe how to implement a complete application and generally include a schematic layout and functional source code in a ZIP file.
Technical Briefs - similar in content to Application Notes but shorter, hence the name "brief". May or may not include source code for the content discussed. Sometimes these documents discuss research oriented topics, such as "PLL Jitter and its Effect on ECAN Protocol".
Code Examples - Quite simply, source code for to demonstrate a functionality (e.g. JPEG entropy coding) or application. A ZIP file containing an MPLAB project, source code, and documentation in a "readme" text file.
User Guides - if using a Microchip hardware development board, the User Guide contains information on its use and its schematics. User Guides are not restricted to documenting development boards.
Tip&Tricks - available as separate documents, or as a compendium of all the documents in a single book. These helpful guides are packed full of ideas on how to get the most out of microcontrollers and their peripherals based upon the vast experience of Microchip's engineers with their customers. Something to refer to in a coffee-break for inspiration when all else has failed!
Not strictly documentation, but definitely something helpful during the design and manufacturing process, are the following electronic files which are sometimes available:
