title: Relative Entropy Estimation in Function Space: Theory and Applications to Trajectory Inference
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: relative-entropy-estimation-in-function-space-theory-and-applications-to-trajectory-inference
authors: Chao Wang; Luca Nepote; Giulio Franzese; Pietro Michiardi
page: 4
section: eurecom
chunk: 46
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20775v1

epth / heads)32/2/8
Decoder (dim / depth / heads)32/2/8
Supernode radius5e−4
GPUs for Training 1×NVIDIA A100
Table 5: FKL hyperparameters for SDEs.
22

estimates remain highly precise and stable throughout.(iv) Temporal discretization.We vary the
number n of sampled time points used to approximate the integral in Equation (7). Over 5 random
seeds, Figure 5d shows that the mean estimate remains close to the ground truth for all n, and the
standard deviation decreases substantially with finer discretization and becomes negligible at n= 80 ,
confirming the strong stability of our estimator.
Together, these results show that FKL estimation is accurate and numerically stable, supporting our
discretization choices for FKL estimation.
(a) Basis truncation.
(b) Velocity-field estimation.
(c) Monte Carlo approximation.
(d) Temporal discretization.
Figure 5: Sensitivity analysis on a Gaussian special case.
Choice of noise covariance operator C.In our function-space formulation, the FFM-based
FKL estimator is accurate and resolution-invariant only when the noise covariance satisfies two
conditions:(i) C is trace-class on the Hilbert space H; and(ii) C satisfies the Cameron-Martin
support assumption (Assumption 3.2), i.e., the Gaussian noise N(0, C) must be rougher than the
data measure. To verify this empirically, we conduct an ablation study on a Gaussian special case
(Case 2 in the top-left table of Figure 1). We test three choices of C and evaluate the FKL estimate
on trajectories sampled at resolutions M∈ {128,256,512,1024} , while keeping the FFM trained at
resolutionM= 256. Results are shown in Figure 6.
When C= Id (white noise), condition(i)fails because C is not trace-class; consequently, the
estimator is not function-space resolution-invariant, with the estimated FKL diverging as the inference
resolution increases. When C is Matérn with smoothness α0 = 6.0, condition(i)holds, but condition
(ii)fails because the noise is smoother than the data measure ( α0 > α 1), leading to unstable and
divergent FKL estimates across all resolutions. In contrast, Matérn C with α0 = 0.5 satisfies
both conditions, yielding accurate and resolution-invariant forward and reverse FKL estimates,
which highlights the importance of choosing a noise covariance that meets both conditions for FKL
evaluation.
For the empirical comparison between white noise and trace-class Matérn noise with smoothness
α0 = 0.5 , in addition to demonstrating the improved robustness of KL estimation under superresolution afforded by trace-class noise (see Figure 6c), we further show that trace-class noise
also provides more robust generation quality under super-resolution (see Figure 7). A theoretical
discussion of this choice is given in Franzese (2025).
23
