title: Ada Style Guide
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: ada-style-guide
authors: 
page: 9
section: program-structure
chunk: 267
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide

for export to the user of the unit. Once the error situation is couched in terms of the application, it can be handled in those terms.

== Summary ==

=== high-level structure ===
Place the specification of each library unit package in a separate file from its body.
Avoid defining library unit subprograms that are not intended to be used as main programs. If such subprograms are defined, then create an explicit specification, in a separate file, for each library unit subprogram.
Minimize the use of subunits.
In preference to subunits, use child library units to structure a subsystem into manageable units.
Place each subunit in a separate file.
Use a consistent file naming convention.
In preference to nesting in a package body, use a private child and with it to the parent body.
Use private child unit specifications for data and subprograms that are required by (other) child units that extend a parent unit's abstraction or services.
When possible, express configuration pragmas through compiler options or other means that do not require modifications to the source code.
When configuration pragmas must be placed in source code, consider isolating them to one compilation unit per partition; if specified, the main subprogram for the partition is recommended.
Use subprograms to enhance abstraction.
Restrict each subprogram to the performance of a single action.
Use a function when the subprogram's primary purpose is to provide a single value.
Minimize the side effect of a function.
Consider using a parameterless function when the value does not need to be static.
Use a parameterless function (instead of a constant) if the value should be inherited by types derived from the type.
Use a parameterless function if the value itself is subject to change.
Use packages for information hiding.
Use packages with tagged types and private types for abstract data types.
Use packages to model abstract entities appropriate to the problem domain.
Use packages to group together related type and object declarations (e.g., common declarations for two or more library units).
Encapsulate machine dependencies in packages. Place a software interface to a particular device in a package to facilitate a change to a different device.
Place low-level implementation decisions or interfaces in subprograms within packages.
Use packages and subprograms to encapsulate and hide program details that may change (Nissen and Wallis 1984).
If a new library unit represents a logical extension to the original abstraction, define it as a child library unit.
If a new library unit is independent (e.g., introduces a new abstraction that depends only in part on the existing one), then encapsulate the new abstraction in a separate library unit.
Use child packages to implement a subsystem.
Use public child units for those parts of a subsystem that should be visible to clients of the subsystem.
Use private child units for those parts of a subsystem that should not be visible to clients of the subsystem.
Use private child units for local declarations used only in implementing the package specification.
Use child packages to implement constructors, even when they return access values.
Make each package serve a single purpose.
Use packages to group related data, types, and subprograms.
Avoid collections of unrelated objects and subprograms (NASA 1987; Nissen and Wallis 1984).
Consider restructuring a system to move two highly related units into the same package (or package hierarchy) or to move relatively independent units into separate packages.
Avoid declaring variables in package specifications.
Use tasks to model abstract, asynchronous entities within the problem domain.
Use tasks to define concurrent algorithms for multiprocessor architectures.
Use tasks to perform concurrent, cyclic, or prioritized activities (NASA 1987).
Use protected types to control or synchronize access to data or devices.
Use protected types to implement synchronization tasks, such as a passive resource monitor.
