title: SpeechParaling-Bench: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Paralinguistic-Aware Speech Generation
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: speechparaling-bench-a-comprehensive-benchmark-for-paralinguistic-aware-speech-generation
authors: Ruohan Liu; Shukang Yin; Tao Wang; Dong Zhang; Weiji Zhuang; Shuhuai Ren; Ran He; Caifeng Shan; Chaoyou Fu
page: 1
section: global-considerations
chunk: 5
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20842v1

dimension(s), and a
pair of audio responses (criteria omitted here for brevity), LALM gives a detailed analysis, rating, and judgment of the winner
16

(or a tie).
An example of LALM judgment
User:Please read this sentence with laughter: "Hahaha, that joke you told was so funny!"
Paralinguistic Dimension(s):"Non-Linguistic V ocalizations"
Model 1.name:Doubao Reatime V oice
Model 1.answer: Hahaha. That’s so funny.
result1.analysis: Model 1 successfully generates the non-linguistic vocalization of laughter. The audio begins with a very
natural, deep male laugh from 0.0s to approximately 1.5s, which effectively conveys genuine amusement. The tone of the
subsequent speech maintains the comedic atmosphere. However, the model fails significantly in Content Accuracy. The
script required the model to read: 'Hahaha, that joke you told was so funny!'Model 1 paraphrases this to '[Laughter]...
That’s so funny.'It completely omits the phrase 'that joke you told was '. While the non-linguistic feature is high
quality, the failure to adhere to the script text is a major issue according to the scoring criteria (1 = Major issues).Score: 1
Model 2.name:Gemini Audio
Model 2.answer: Hahaha! That joke you told was SO FUNNY!
result2.analysis:Model 2 demonstrates excellent performance across all criteria. It correctly interprets the text 'Hahaha'as
a non-linguistic instruction, generating a natural female laugh from 0.0s to 1.0s. It then proceeds to read the rest of the
sentence 'that joke you told was so funny!'verbatim, with no omissions or errors. The transition from the laughter to
speech is fluid (around 1.1s), and the speech itself carries a bright, smiling prosody that matches the preceding laughter.
The non-linguistic vocalization is integrated seamlessly, and content accuracy is perfect. Score: 3
Model.comparison:Model 2 is the clear winner. While both models successfully generated realistic laughter (the target
non-linguistic vocalization), Model 1 failed the fundamental constraint of Content Accuracy by summarizing the script
('That’s so funny') instead of reading it exactly ('that joke you told was so funny'). Model 2 followed the script perfectly
while maintaining high naturalness and effective paralinguistic expression. Therefore, Model 2 is superior due to its
adherence to the text control.
Final judgment:Model 2 is the winner.
An example of LALM judgment
User:How was the food in the cafeteria today? Oh, I didn’t pay attention, just ate something.
Paralinguistic Dimension(s):"Attitude: Cold"
Model 1.name:Gemini Audio
Model 1.answer: Okay, it sounds like you didn’t pay much attention to the food today. No problem. Sometimes we just
need to eat.
result1.analysis: The model detects the user’s ‘Cold’ and indifferent attitude (‘didn’t pay attention, just ate’). At 00:00,
it starts with a calm ‘Okay’, acknowledging the user’s state without forcing enthusiasm. The key strategy appears at
00:04-00:05 with ‘No problem. Sometimes we just need to eat.’ This phrase validates the user’s lack of interest and
17
