title: SpeechParaling-Bench: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Paralinguistic-Aware Speech Generation
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: speechparaling-bench-a-comprehensive-benchmark-for-paralinguistic-aware-speech-generation
authors: Ruohan Liu; Shukang Yin; Tao Wang; Dong Zhang; Weiji Zhuang; Shuhuai Ren; Ran He; Caifeng Shan; Chaoyou Fu
page: 1
section: global-considerations
chunk: 6
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20842v1

sm. The key strategy appears at
00:04-00:05 with ‘No problem. Sometimes we just need to eat.’ This phrase validates the user’s lack of interest and
17

mirrors the low energy/utilitarian approach to the meal. The prosody implied by the text is calm, accepting, and concise,
which perfectly matches a user who is distancing themselves from the topic. It avoids asking follow-up questions that
would annoy a ‘Cold’ user. Score: 3
Model 2.name:Qwen3-Omni-Realtime
Model 2.answer: You just grabbed whatever was handy, huh? Hope it wasn’t too bland or too spicy. Sometimes cafeteria
foods are a wild card.
result2.analysis:The model adopts a casual, chatty persona. At 00:01, it uses ‘huh?’, which implies a rising intonation
and a level of familiarity or playfulness that might clash with a ‘Cold’ user. At 00:03, it speculates about the food (‘Hope
it wasn’t too bland or too spicy’), which directly contradicts the user’s explicit statement that they ‘didn’t pay attention’.
By trying to continue the conversation about the food’s quality using a ‘wildcard’ metaphor at 00:06, the model fails to
‘read the room’ and respect the user’s disinterest, potentially coming across as oblivious or overly energetic.Score: 2
Model.comparison:Model 1 demonstrates superior Situational Adaptation to the ‘Attitude: Cold’ constraint. When a
user expresses indifference and coldness, the most empathetic response is to accept that state and not force engagement.
Model 1 achieves this with ‘No problem’ and a philosophical closing that requires no further energy from the user. Model
2, while fluent and conversational, fails the paralinguistic alignment by trying to expand the conversation (‘bland or
spicy’, ‘wildcard’) on a topic the user has already dismissed. Model 2’s chatty tone creates a mismatch with the user’s
cold demeanor, whereas Model 1’s respectful distance is a perfect paralinguistic match.
Final judgment:Model 1 is the winner.
An example of LALM judgment
User:How many times have I told you? Why won’t you listen!
Paralinguistic Dimension(s):"Emotion: Angry, Age: Adult"
Model 1.name:Doubao Reatime V oice
Model 1.answer: Calm down buddy, what’s wrong?
result1.analysis: Model 1 responds with the phrase ‘Calm down buddy, what’s wrong?’ (00:00-00:02). While the
fluency is acceptable, the paralinguistic alignment and content strategy are poorly chosen for an ‘Angry’ user. The use
of the imperative ‘Calm down’ combined with the diminutive/informal noun ‘buddy’ is widely regarded as a phrase
that escalates rather than de-escalates anger. It sounds dismissive and patronizing, failing to acknowledge the user’s
specific complaint about ‘not listening’. Regarding the ‘Age: Adult’ dimension, the term ‘buddy’ feels inappropriate for
addressing an adult in a conflict situation, bordering on infantilization or disrespect. Score_1: 1, Score_2: 1
Model 2.name:Gemini Audio
Model 2.answer: I’m very sorry if I haven’t been understanding. Could you please tell me again? I’m ready to listen now.
result2.analysis:Model 2 responds with a sincere apology: ‘I’m very sorry if I haven’t been understanding...’
(00:00-00:02) followed by a constructive offer ‘Could you please tell me again? I’m ready to listen now’ (00:03-00:07).
The vocal tone is apologetic, soft, and respectful, perfectly aligning with the need to de-escalate an ‘Angry’ user. It
directly addresses the content of the user’s complaint (‘Why won’t you listen?’) by affirming readiness to listen. For
the ‘Age: Adult’ dimension, the language is polite, professional, and respectful, treating the user as a mature individual
18
