title: Tokenised Flow Matching for Hierarchical Simulation Based Inference
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: tokenised-flow-matching-for-hierarchical-simulation-based-inference
authors: Giovanni Charles; Cosmo Santoni; Seth Flaxman; Elizaveta Semenova
page: 1
section: gpu-nvidia-a100-pcie-40gb
chunk: 22
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20723v1

parates tokens belonging to each site without requiring the architecture to deduce
it from the multi-site data and the positional embeddings alone.
22

PF This ablation replaces LF sampling with posterior factorisation (Equation 2) while keeping the
TFMPE tokenised flow-matching backbone, group embeddings, optimiser, and schedule fixed.
Two TFMPE estimators are trained sequentially: a global estimatorqϕg(θg |y )on simulations
with variable site countsn∈ { 1, . . . , ns} (drawn via stick-breaking so the simulation budget is
spent exactly), and a local estimatorqϕl(ηs |θ g, ys)on single-site slices of the same simulations
conditioned on samples from the trained global estimator. This isolates the effect of swapping
LF for PF from the architectural and training differences between TFMPE and the PF baseline
of Heinrich et al. (2024).
The ablation results broadly show that TFMPE performs best over the hierarchical SBI benchmark
with a few caveats. The MLP ablation showed close agreement with TFMPE, making it a strong
candidate for a computationally efficient alternative. However, in Gaussian Linear Uniform and
SLCP it exhibited less stable posterior consistency and in the Gaussian Mixture task it reliably failed
to capture the posterior. This is likely due to the fixed inferential bottleneck inherent to the MLP
not being able to capture the site specific parameters. If using the MLP, we recommend tuning the
model size to each particular problem. The "Direct" experiment revealed that little inconsistency is
due to surrogate approximation error, as its metrics closely track TFMPE’s. The "Joint" experiment
uncovered delayed convergence for Gaussian Linear tasks and unstable estimators for SLCP, when
the estimators were combined into a unified estimator. The "No Grouping" ablation removes the
group id embedding, forcing the model to recover site membership from positional patterns alone;
this collapses performance broadly across the benchmark, confirming that the group embedding is a
load-bearing component of the tokenisation scheme. The "PF" ablation isolates the effect of the
factorisation strategy: because it reuses the TFMPE backbone and only swaps LF sampling for
posterior factorisation, any gap with TFMPE is attributable to the factorisation itself rather than to
architectural or optimiser differences. It degrades performance reliably across the benchmark relative
to LF sampling, which establishes LF as the driver of TFMPE’s sample-efficiency advantage on these
tasks. Residual differences between the PF ablation and the Heinrich et al. (2024) PF baseline in
Figure 3 go in both directions across tasks and reflect architectural and training choices (transformer
vs. MAF+DeepSet, flow matching vs. normalising flows, optimiser and schedule); disentangling these
is a promising direction for future work.
A.6 1D hemodynamics CFD simulator
We include a networked 1D arterial hemodynamics example as a realistic hierarchical SBI task. The
simulator returns function-valued outputs (flow and pressure traces) and has many outlet-specific
parameters, making it a natural setting for tokenised amortised inference. The observations are
synthetic data generated by a validated 1D CFD solver calibrated to real arterial geometries, rather
than real patient measurements.
Governing equations and vessel model.We use a standard 1D pulse-wave model for area
A(x, t)and flowQ(x, t)on each vessel:
∂A
∂t + ∂Q
∂x = 0,(8)
∂Q
∂t + ∂
∂x

α Q2
A

+ A
ρ
∂p
∂x =− KRQ
A ,(9)
with momentum-flux coefficientα= 1in our solver. Pressure is related to area by
p(A)−p ext = β
A0
√
A−
p
A0

,(10)
23
