title: DAIRE: A lightweight AI model for real-time detection of Controller Area Network attacks in the Internet of Vehicles
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: daire-a-lightweight-ai-model-for-real-time-detection-of-controller-area-network-attacks-in-the-internet-of-vehicles
authors: Shahid Alam; Amina Jameel; Zahida Parveen; Ehab Alnfrawy; Adeela Ashraf; Raza Uddin; Jamal Aqib
page: 9
section: cicids-2017
chunk: 62
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20771v1

rential privacy.

Alladi
et al.
(2021)
98.26% NR 1.55 ms NR VeReMi Extension ARM Cortex-A53; 1.2 GHz;
single core.
CAN data to image;
Lightweight CNN.

Fig. 9. Comparison of DAIRE with six state-of-the-art works.
computational power alone does not account for the considerable time
difference observed.
DAIRE achieves an average DR of 99.78% on the Car-Hacking
dataset, performing on par with or better than the six other studies. Its
FPR of 0.04% surpasses the two other works that reported their FPRs.
Our lightweight ANN model is developed through an empirical design
approach, with a detailed explanation of the optimization process and
how it was tailored to the specific task using experiments conducted on
a subset of the dataset.
6.2. Future works
There are two deployment approaches for an IDS for a network
of IoVs. Centralized and distributed (Taslimasa et al., 2023). In a
centralized approach, the IDS is deployed on a remote cloud or an edge
server. In a distributed approach, the IDS is deployed on each network
node, i.e., an IoV, and the attack data is shared collaboratively. There
are pros and cons in both approaches. A distributed approach is more
secure and private and does not require high bandwidth. Whereas,
centralized approach is more suitable for resource-constrained IoVs.
Some disadvantages of a distributed approach are: lack of accuracy;
heterogeneous network with different normal and abnormal behaviors;
and the collaboration results may diverge from the global optimized
point. Some disadvantages of a centralized approach are: the single
point of failure, scalability, and the requirement of a large bandwidth.
IDS deployment is an open research problem (Taslimasa et al., 2023).
In the future, we would like to explore the installation and deployment
of DAIRE as part of an IDS using a distributed approach on a network
of IoVs using TinyML (Ray, 2022). In our opinion distributed approach
is more scalable and secure.
DAIRE is evaluated using datasets for wired networks that contain
specific attacks, such as DoS, fuzzy, and spoofing. In the future, we
would like to evaluate DAIRE against other types of generalized datasets
that also contain malicious activities related to mobility features and
data with varying traffic conditions, such as routing attacks, speed of
vehicle, and distance between vehicles, etc.
In the future, we aim to evaluate DAIRE against adversarial ML
attacks (Malik et al., 2024). These attacks are designed to disrupt the
prediction accuracy of an ML model by altering inputs, leading the
model to misclassify. If successfully executed, they can greatly diminish
a model’s precision and in the case of IoVs, can lead to severe damage.
The Adversarial Robustness Toolbox (ART) (Nicolae et al., 2018) is an
open-source Python library developed by IBM Research. It is designed
to help researchers and practitioners assess and enhance the resilience
of ML models against adversarial attacks. We will use ART to create
adversarial examples of IoV attacks and evaluate DAIRE’s performance
in response to these attacks.
6.3. Real-world deployment considerations
DAIRE is capable of detecting not only major types of CAN attacks
but also less common attacks, such as Gas Spoofing and RPM Spoofing,
which are crucial for real-world applications. With an inference time
of just 0.03 ms, DAIRE offers deterministic latency, making it suitable
Machine Learning with Applications 23 (2026) 100859
13
