title: Personalized electric vehicle energy consumption estimation framework that integrates driver behavior with map data
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: personalized-electric-vehicle-energy-consumption-estimation-framework-that-integrates-driver-behavior-with-map-data
authors: Sreechakra Vasudeva Raju Rachavelpula; Sangwhan Cha
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 22
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20764v1

round
The Driver LSTM Module employs a sequence-to-sequence Bidirectional
LSTM-based hybrid encoder-decoder architecture similar to the one used by
11

Paparusso et al. [8] to capture temporal dependencies between past driving
behavior and future road geometry for future vehicle state prediction. The
framework addresses the inherently sequential, nonlinear nature of drivervehicle dynamics conditioned by both historical behavior and upcoming road
features.
Problem Formulation..Given position indexk, past window sizes P, and
prediction horizons F, the model approximates:
fθ :

X vP
(k−sP :k), XrP
(k−sP :k), XrF
(k+1:k+sF )

7→Y vF
(k+1:k+sF ) (7)
whereX vP ∈R (sP +1)×nv contains past vehicle states such as velocity and
acceleration,X rP ∈R (sP +1)×nr andX rF ∈R sF ×nr contain past and future
road features suchas elevation, heading, speed limit, curvature, traffic control
flags, and edge classification, respectively, andYvF ∈R sF ×qv represents predicted future vehicle states. Herenv is the number of input vehicle states,nr
is the number of input road features, andqv ≤n v is the number of predicted
vehicle states.
4.5.2. Architecture and Implementation
We propose the hybrid encoder-decoder architecture shown in Fig. 4
which comprises two encoders that project the past driving and future road
context into latent states which are then used by a recursive decoder for
predicting future vehicle states:
1)Past Driving Encoder:ConcatenatedX vP andX rP are encoded via
a BiLSTM layer (ue = 32units). Forward and backward final hidden
states(h P
F , hP
B)and cell states(c P
F , cP
B)are concatenated to form unified
past state representationshP andc P.
2)Future Road Encoder:X rF is encoded through a separate BiLSTM
layer (of hidden sizeue = 32units), producing similarly concatenated
forward and backward hidden stateshF and cell statesc F which represent the future road context.
3)State Fusion:Concatenated past and future hidden statesh P F =
[hP , hF ]and cell statesc P F = [cP , cF ]are projected through two dense
layers with2u e andu d neurons and a dropout (r= 0.25) for regularization, yielding state vectorshD andc D.
12
