title: Personalized electric vehicle energy consumption estimation framework that integrates driver behavior with map data
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: personalized-electric-vehicle-energy-consumption-estimation-framework-that-integrates-driver-behavior-with-map-data
authors: Sreechakra Vasudeva Raju Rachavelpula; Sangwhan Cha
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 23
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20764v1

P , cF ]are projected through two dense
layers with2u e andu d neurons and a dropout (r= 0.25) for regularization, yielding state vectorshD andc D.
12

4)Recursive Decoder:A unidirectional LSTM (u d = 64units) initialized with statesh D andc D and the first cell fed withhD as input
generates sequences autoregressively. The output sequence feeds into
a BiLSTM layer (ud = 64units) followed by a time-distributed dense
layer producing the sequence of future vehicle state predictions,ˆY vF.
Input sequences uses P = 50past steps ands F = 100future prediction steps. Input features include the vehicle states longitudinal velocity
and acceleration and road features elevation, heading, speed limit, average
edge speed, curvature, traffic signals, stop/yield signs, roundabouts, edge
classification, link flags, and engineered start-stop indicators. Vehicle speed
is the predicted future variable. Continuous features are scaled via SciPy’s
StandardScalerwhile categorical features are unscaled.
Training..TheIEEEVehicleSpeedDataset[21]containing5973rides(9049.3
km) at 1-meter spatial resolution from Czech Republic driving data was used
fortrainingtheDriverLSTMmodel. Duetoinconsistenciesinthecategorical
road features of the original dataset, additional road features were generated
using the Route Processor module and were appended to the original dataset.
This amended dataset was used in training. Training employed Adam optimizer with learning rate 0.0001, mean-squared error loss function, 70:15:15
train/validation/test split, 30 epochs with early stopping, and sequence generation using stride length of 10 steps with padding. Multiple retraining
iterations with data randomization were done to minimize mean absolute
error.
Inference..The selected route from the Map Display Handler is discretized
to 1-meter intervals and the road features are retrieved for these discretized
coordinates using Route Processor. The PID Controller generated velocity
and acceleration profiles are then interpolated onto these discretized coordinates, forming the past vehicle states. These data points are subsequently
processed, using a stride of 10 steps, into batches of sequences containing past
vehicle statesX vP, past road-context featuresXrP, and future road-context
featuresX rF. These batches of past and future feature matrices are fed into
the loaded best LSTM model to predict the future velocity profileˆY vF, from
which only the first 10 predicted steps are retained for each inference window.
The predicted velocity segments are then post-processed using a first-order
Butterworth low-pass filter followed by a zero-phase forward-backward filter to remove high-frequency noise without phase distortion. The resulting
13
