title: Advanced Robotics Book
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: advanced-robotics-book
authors: 
page: 1
section: advanced-robotics-book
chunk: 11
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Advanced_Robotics_Book

== Robot Hardware ==

Since robots are meant to work in the real world, just as humans need their body and heart to function, robots need some sort of hardware to serve as their "body". The hardware of a robot is anything physical used to help the robot operate in a certain way. The hardware needed to build a robot is diverse. It depends on what type of robot one is building. If the robot is an automated factory worker the hardware could involve all sorts of sophisticated and heavy industry tools. If, on the other hand, one is working to build a humanoid or space exploration robot, the hardware can be muscle wire or sensitive lenses, for example.
Robots use many different types of hardware to allow the robots to function in a specific way. Hardware is what allows a robot to move in a certain way. Robots use motors in order to move. Some may only have one motor which allows them to move forward and backward only at a particular speed. Robots with more than one motor have the added capability to make turns as well. By allowing one motor to move quicker than another one, the robot can make a turn in the direction of the slower-moving motor. A programmer can program the motors to move at different speeds, which allows the robot more capacity for work.
Robots also have driving mechanisms, which include gears, chains, pulleys, belts, and gearboxes. The central purpose of the gears and chains is to pass on the rotary movement from one place to another; during this process, there is also a possibility to change the speed or the direction of the movement. These driving mechanisms can help the robot transfer pressure from one place to another on the robot to keep the weight of the robot uniform. They can also help the motors move smoothly. While pulleys and belts also have the same function as gears and chains, pulleys have shapes like wheels that have grooves around their edges.
In order to build a more intelligent robot, one also can install sensors to give a robot more life. For example, a robot can have a touch sensor that, when programmed, may allow a robot to back away when it runs into an object. Robots can also use sound sensors to play sounds as well as to hear sounds and respond to them appropriately. Light sensors allow robots to perform some action or task when they enter a space that has a certain amount of light. A simple example of this is programming a robot to follow a line; by sensing the darkness of a line, the robot can follow it without straying from the path. Robots can also use ultrasonic sensors to sense an object or a person in front of it without having to actually touch or run into it. This may be helpful with especially fragile robots; being able to avoid touching objects may keep pressure off of delicate areas in the build.
Robots also need some sort of a power supply. In a Lego Mindstorms NXT robot, the power supply is the brick. It holds the batteries as well as all the ports in order to plug in motors and sensors. Without the brick, a robot would not be able to move or function in any way. The brick is the main source of the energy for the robot.
Robots can also be used along with cameras. Attaching a camera or a microphone to a robot can allow a person to move the robot and see where it is going or hear what it going on in the surrounding areas. These extra hardware packages can make the robot smarter and more creative.
