title: Advanced Robotics Book
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: advanced-robotics-book
authors: 
page: 1
section: advanced-robotics-book
chunk: 20
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Advanced_Robotics_Book

its turning in different directions. A robot should also be able to create a continuous motion during its task in order to achieve the goal smoothly.

== Robot Vision ==
The field of robot vision guidance is a field that is developing at a very fast pace. With the benefits of high level and degree technology, it gives savings, reliability, productivity, and safety. Both identification and navigation are used when it comes to robot vision. Vision applications are generally made for finding a part and positioning it for inspection or robotic handling before another application is performed. There are times when multiple mechanical tools can be replaced with single robot stations by a vision guided robot.
When a robot needs the vision ability, it takes the combination of calibration, temperature, software, cameras, and algorithms for it to work. The calibration of the systems for robot vision is dependent on application. Those applications can range from simple guidance applications to applications that are more complex that need the data from more than one sensor to work. Algorithms are things that are always improving and allow for more high level and more complex detection. There are robots that now have collision detection, which is something that tells the system when the robot is about to hit something. This ability allows the robots to work along with robots in areas with obstacles and not have the fear of having a major collision. The robot would stop moving for a bit when it detects another object in its way that is restricting its movement.
Robot vision simplifies processes making them more straightforward, and, in turn, that cuts costs. Fixturing and hard tooling are both eliminated when robot vision is uses. The products can be identified and the applications can be performed without the need for securing. There are savings in the machinery and labor department. There is no need for labor because the robot now handles its own loading of parts.
There are steps one can take when trying to decide on the right type of robot guidance system. One should work with an integrator and keep some things in mind. One must make sure that the robot vision is able to connect with the robot system and the applications for it. If something were to disconnect, then that could harm the robot or the product and could cause a loss in quality and production. One must also make sure that the environment that the robot is in is a controlled one so that the robot vision remains aware and sharp. Finally, one must consider all of the elements in the environment, like the lighting, the chemicals in the air, and the color changes, as they can affect what a robot sees in its vision.
