title: Advanced Robotics Book
source: wikibooks
year: undated
document_id: advanced-robotics-book
authors: 
page: 1
section: advanced-robotics-book
chunk: 22
source_ref: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Advanced_Robotics_Book

can be money- and time-consuming. Knowledge based visions systems still should be researched and altered to work better in dynamic worldly situations.

== Robots and Artificial Intelligence ==
Artificial Intelligence is one of the fields in robotics that harbors the most excitement. When it comes to controversy in the field of robotics, AI is always at the top of the list. While everyone can agree that a robot is capable enough to work on an assembly line, not everyone can agree that a robot can be intelligent on its own. Artificial Intelligence is as hard a term to define as robot. An Ultimate AI would be a man-made machine that has human beings’ intellectual abilities; it would be a recreation of the human thought process. With these abilities, the robot would be able to learn almost anything; it would be able to create its own ideas, learn how to use human language, and reason. Right now, the area of robotics is nowhere near this level of Artificial Intelligence, but it has been making progress in areas of limited AI.
Computers are already able to solve problems to some degree, as the basic idea of Artificial Intelligence problem solving is very simple. It is the execution that is the complicated part. First the computer, or robot, has to gather the facts of a situation through what a human tells it or through its own sensors. The computer then compares the information to stored data and then decides what the information means. The computer then runs through different types of actions that it could take and decides which action is best suited based on the information that it gathered. It is only capable of solving the problem that it is given and does not have any analytical ability.
The real challenge when it comes to Artificial Intelligence is trying to understand how natural intelligence works. Since scientists do not have a solid model to work from, developing an A.I is not like building an artificial heart. Scientists know that the brain contains billions of neurons and that it’s the electrical connection between the different neurons that allow people to think and learn. What they don’t know is how the connections add up to having higher reasoning or even operations of the low level, and it is this complex circuitry that is difficult to understand.
