title: AAC: Admissible-by-Architecture Differentiable Landmark Compression for ALT
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: aac-admissible-by-architecture-differentiable-landmark-compression-for-alt
authors: An T. Le; Vien Ngo
page: 1
section: aac-fps-alt
chunk: 13
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20744v1

regret in the same order of magnitude as the blackbox baseline; among the
baselines compared here, no other method offers all three simultaneously.
49

Table 24: ABLATIONCost regret by training mode on Warcraft12×12(CNN encoder, 3 seeds). The encoder
drives the learning signal; freezing the compressor has no effect. BB: blackbox baseline (Vlastelica et al.,
2020).
Training Mode Cost Regret↓
Full E2E 0.144±0.027
Frozen Compressor 0.144±0.027
Frozen Encoder 1.012
BB†(baseline)0.173
†Vlastelica et al. (2020).
Comparison with Neural A* and iA*.Neural A* (Yonetani et al., 2021) reports∼98% cost-optimal
paths on Warcraft 12×12 maps (their “optimality” metric measures whether the found path achieves optimal
cost, which is strictly weaker than our “path match” metric that requires the exact same path). iA* (Chen
et al., 2025) improves Neural A*’s search efficiency and out-of-distribution generalization on similar gridplanning tasks. Neither method provides admissibility guarantees. Direct numerical comparison in Table 23
is complicated by metric differences: Neural A* reports optimality rate and search efficiency rather than cost
regret, Jaccard, or exact path match. We include both in Table 23 with their published optimality metric
for reference. The key regime distinction is that Neural A* and iA* learn powerful guidance functions that
may violate admissibility, while AAC guarantees admissibility architecturally at the cost of lower path-match
accuracy; the approaches are complementary rather than competing.
G Reproducibility
Data and code availability.We provide the implementation and reproducing scripts athttps:
//github.com/anindex/aac. The repository contains the full source tree, all result CSV tables backing every Table and Figure in this paper, and the verbatim pre-registered OGB-arXiv prediction at
results/PREREG.md(Appendix E). The repositoryresults/README.mdprovides the per-Section / perTable / per-Figure mapping to its generating experiment record. Installation, environment setup, and full
reproduction commands are in the repositoryREADME.md.
Hyperparameters.Key settings:K 0∈{32,64,128},m∈{8,16,32,64}, learning rate10−3,200epochs
(static) /100epochs (contextual), batch size256(static) /24(contextual), Adam optimizer. The full
hyperparameter grid lives in YAML configuration files alongside the released code.
Sentinel masking.Unreachable landmark distances are stored as a sentinel (1018) and masked out of the
maxcomputation; the theorems of Section 3.3 do not depend on the specific magnitude. The released unit
tests verify admissibility under sentinel masking, and the run-time SCC audit confirms that query endpoints
share an SCC on every benchmark graph so the masking path is never taken in production runs.
H Broader Impact
The value of AAC lies in safety-critical, ML-integrated planning pipelines: the architectural admissibility
guarantee (Proposition 2) holds in exact arithmetic given exact teacher labels regardless of training quality,
distribution shift, or early stopping, a property optimization-dependent guarantees cannot match. Fewer A*
expansions reduce compute and energy cost for large-scale routing (up to 92% reduction at 128B/v on the
4.5M-node Netherlands network). Admissibility guarantees optimal pathcostbut not other path qualities
(smoothness, safety-corridor width); the method requires precomputed landmark distances, restricting it to
settings where graph structure is known offline; we do not foresee direct negative societal impacts beyond
the dual-use nature of any routing improvement.
50
