title: Gauge-Equivariant Graph Neural Networks for Lattice Gauge Theories
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: gauge-equivariant-graph-neural-networks-for-lattice-gauge-theories
authors: Ali Rayat; Yaohang Li; Gia-Wei Chern
page: 3
section: gauge-ma-tter-systems
chunk: 40
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20797v1

significance. Because the energy
depends on fermionic states delocalized across the entire
lattice, the learnedε i implicitly encode fermion-mediated

7
correlations that are intrinsically nonlocal.
Within this framework, the quantitiesε i should be
viewed as latent variables that provide a symmetryconsistent decomposition of a global observable, rather
than physically well-defined local energies. The key point
is that both local observables and global quantities are
represented within a unified local embedding: the network constructs site-resolved features that simultaneously predictn i and, when aggregated, recoverE. In
doing so, it implicitly encodes fermion-mediated correlations over extended length scales, enabling a local, gaugeequivariant architecture to approximate observables governed by globally entangled degrees of freedom.
As summarized in Fig. 3, the gauge-equivariant architecture achieves high accuracy across both gauge groups.
For SU(2), the energy prediction attains a test MSE of
6.7×10 −8 (R2 = 0.973), while the density task yields
2.9×10 −5 (R2 = 0.976). For SU(3), the energy accuracy
further improves to 1.6×10 −8 (R2 = 0.994), with density prediction at 3.3×10 −5 (R2 = 0.953). Parity plots
exhibit a tight collapse onto the diagonal with sharply
peaked error distributions, and the close agreement between training and test metrics indicates robust generalization.
Notably, near-saturation accuracy is achieved with
only shallow architectures. This does not imply that
the learned representation is short-ranged. While message passing is local at the architectural level, the effective interactions are mediated by fermions and are therefore intrinsically nonlocal. In practice, this nonlocality is captured through repeated gauge-covariant transport and contraction operations, which concatenate link
variables along extended paths. As a result, even shallow networks generate features corresponding to Wilson
lines of increasing spatial extent, and the effective receptive field—measured in gauge transport length—grows
rapidly beyond the naive graph distance. This mechanism enables the model to capture fermion-mediated correlations across the lattice despite its local construction.
Taken together, these results demonstrate that gaugeequivariant graph neural networks provide a unified and
scalable framework that simultaneously resolves local observables and reconstructs global quantities through latent local representations, even in systems where the
underlying physics is governed by intrinsically nonlocal,
fermion-mediated interactions.
V. LEARNING GAUGE DYNAMICS WITH
