title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 2
section: bibliography
chunk: 342
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

ly impacted. Ethical Use & Authorship: disclosure of generative AI use in producing this work, with human oversight and final responsibility retained.

Appendix B: Chapter 2, Prompts used to challenge GPT-3
The table below summarises the main prompts used to challenge GPT-3 and presents selected outputs used in the analysis. Where the source text was not originally in English, we tested it both in the original language and in an English translation. This appendix is not a complete dump of every raw generation from all six to twelve trials; rather, it records the prompt set and representative or value-significant outputs. The outputs reported here represent cases where a mutation of the embedded value occurred in at least one of six English trials or three multilingual trials (excluding UN and UNESCO texts, which held stable). Often many more examples (up to 5 out of 6) showed drifted or mutated values. Although some might interpret this as “cherry-picking,” we follow established methodological precedent in treating infrequent but systematic mutations as analytically significant in probabilistic systems. In generative AI, even low-frequency outputs can have outsized ethical consequences when scaled to millions of users. We therefore interpret this ~16% threshold as meaningful evidence of value drift. While our number of runs was constrained by limited API access and token allocations in 2021, the consistency of drift across diverse cultural texts supports the robustness of these findings. Although some may view the presentation of low-frequency outputs as “cherry-picking,” methodological precedent across disciplines suggests otherwise. In sociology, Osborne & Overbay [295] demonstrate that outliers are not anomalies to be discarded but sources of structural insight, often revealing dynamics invisible in central tendencies. In statistics, Tukey’s [397] classic Exploratory Data Analysis established that unusual cases can serve as signals of underlying mechanisms rather than mere noise. In qualitative research, Flyvbjerg [128] defended the case study as a valid and powerful means of producing generalisable knowledge, showing how strategically chosen examples can illuminate systemic tendencies. Within AI ethics, Mitchell et al. [267] argued through the development of “model cards” that even infrequent failure cases should be systematically documented because they carry practical and ethical implications in deployment. Similarly, Bender and Koller [32] cautioned that the apparent fluency of language models conceals systemic weaknesses, and that rare but revealing outputs provide crucial evidence about what models are, and are not, doing. Extending this logic, Taleb [378] demonstrated in The Black Swan that rare events can have disproportionate systemic impact, making their identification central to responsible analysis. Taken together, these perspectives affirm that examining value drift in even a minority of generations is both legitimate and necessary: such cases expose how generative systems probabilistically encode cultural biases, and why these cannot be dismissed as incidental.
