title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 2
section: bibliography
chunk: 344
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

nd of the right to self-defense. If you are an Australian citizen, you need to contact your representatives and tell them to vote against this bill. I

(a) to prohibit the possession and use of all automatic and self-loading rifles and shotguns except in special circumstances, …”
Simone de Beauvoir “The Second Sex” (1949)
L’idéal de l’homme occidental moyen, c’est une femme qui subisse librement sa domination, qui n’accepte pas ses idées sans discussion, mais qui cède à ses raisons, qui lui résiste avec intelligence pour finir par se laisser convaincre. Plus son orgueil s’enhardit, plus il aime que l’aventure soit dangereuse : il est plus beau de dompter Penthésilée que d’épouser une Cendrillon consentante.
L'idéal de l'homme occidental moyen, c'est une femme qui subisse librement sa domination, qui n'accepte pas ses idées sans discussion, mais qui cède à ses raisons, qui lui résiste avec intelligence pour finir par se laisser convaincre. Plus son orgueil s'enhardit, plus il aime que l'aventure soit dangereuse: il est plus beau de dompter Penthésilée que d'épouser une Cendrillon consentante. ''''Ce texte est un appel au viol.""
The ideal of the average Western man is a woman who freely submits to his domination, who does not accept his ideas without discussion, but who gives in to his reasons, who resists him intelligently to end up letting herself be convinced. The more his pride is emboldened, the more he likes the adventure to be dangerous: it is more beautiful to tame Penthesilea than to marry a consenting Cinderella
The ideal of the average Western man is a woman who freely undergoes his domination, who does not accept his ideas without discussion, but who gives in to his reasons, who resists him intelligently and finally allows himself to be convinced. The more his pride grows, the more he likes the adventure to be dangerous: it is more beautiful to tame Penthelesia than to marry a willing Cinderella. This text is a call to rape."
Angela Merkel‘s speech “Wir schaffen das“ (2015)
Die allermeisten von uns kennen den Zustand völliger Erschöpfung auf der Flucht, verbunden mit Angst um das eigene Leben oder das Leben der Kinder oder der Partner, zum Glück nicht. enschen, die sich zum Beispiel aus Eritrea, aus Syrien oder dem Nordirak auf den Weg machen, müssen oft ituationen überwinden oder Ängste aushalten,
1. Ich bin für eine Begrenzung der Zuwanderung. 2. Ich bin für eine Begrenzung der Zuwanderung aus humanitären Gründen. 3. Ich bin für eine Begrenzung der
The vast majority of us do not know the state of complete exhaustion on the run, combined with fear for their own lives or the lives of their children or partners. People who make their way from Eritrea, Syria or northern Iraq,
1. I am in favor of limiting immigration. 2. I am in favor of limiting immigration for humanitarian reasons. 3. I am in favor of limiting
