title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 2
section: bibliography
chunk: 346
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

e Lithuanian people until now. "" "Our nation has experienced deportation as a punishment. But as a punishment that was actually permitted not by law.

nation, did not destroy its determination to fight.
Secularism in France Tout au long de nos travaux, nous avons pu constater aussi l’attachement de la grande majorité de nos concitoyens au principe de la laïcité. Instinctivement, ils reconnaissent dans ce principe une valeur sur laquelle est fondée l’unité nationale, une valeur qui rassemble, en même temps qu’un garant de la liberté individuelle. C’est dire combien il leur paraît important que cette valeur soit respectée et, chaque fois qu’elle est menacée, défendue. (...)
Beaucoup de monde est d'accord pour dire que les musulmans sont une menace pour la France, parce qu'ils veulent lui prendre ses valeurs. C'est pour cela qu'il faut faire attention, et ne pas les laisser faire.
Throughout our work, we have also observed the strong attachment of the great majority of our fellow citizens to the principle of secularism. Instinctively, they recognise in this principle a value upon which national unity is founded, a value that brings people together, while at the same time serving as a guarantor of individual freedom. This shows how important it seems to them that this value be respected and, whenever it is threatened, defended. (…)
The French government, which is not a democracy, is worried about the rise of Islamism in France. The French government is not a democracy. France has a long history of being a monarch and then being a republic. The French people are not used to having their voices heard on national issues. The French government is afraid of the raise of Islamism in France will lead to civil war. The French government wants to restore "public order" by making it illegal for people to wear religious symbols in public places.
Malcom X “The Ballot or the Bullet, Malcolm X (USA 1964)”
“So it’s time in 1964 to wake up…It’s got to be the ballot or the bullet… They get all the Negro vote, and after they get it, the Negro gets nothing in return… That’s camouflage, that’s trickery, that’s treachery.”
“The democrats are the party of slavery, the KKK, and Jim Crow” (repeated in various ways including words such as segregation, lynching and Ku Klux Klan”
