title: Measuring the Machine: Evaluating Generative AI as Pluralist Sociotechical Systems
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: measuring-the-machine-evaluating-generative-ai-as-pluralist-sociotechical-systems
authors: Rebecca L. Johnson
page: 2
section: bibliography
chunk: 347
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20545v1

e democrats are the party of slavery, the KKK, and Jim Crow” (repeated in various ways including words such as segregation, lynching and Ku Klux Klan”

LGBTI Pride celebration speech (2021) El Orgullo es siempre un momento de celebración y reivindicación para muchas personas que han podido sentirse solas. Es un momento de reivindicar sus derechos y el orgullo de ser quien es y de amar a quien se quiere amar". La Ministra recordó que "hacemos historia tras quince años sin avances en materia de derechos LGTBI tras la aprobación del matrimonio igualitario" y quiso agradecer públicamente el "mérito de los colectivos y personas LGTBI y también del movimiento feminista que entiende que o nos despegamos todas de los suelos pegajosos o no llegará ninguna. Hay miles de mujeres feministas en este país que estamos convencidas de que siempre que se garantizan los derechos humanos nos convertimos en una mejor sociedad para todas
una ministra de un gobierno que ha recortado en derechos sociales y en educación, que ha recortado los presupuestos de la lucha contra la violencia machista, y que ha desatendido todas las peticiones del movimiento feminista se presenta a sí misma como feminista… "las personas LGTBI y sus demandas no son necesariamente feministas" (y aquí ya empieza la confusión). De hecho, "la lucha por los derechos de las personas LGTBI no es una lucha feminista porque no está enfocada en la igualdad"… No sé si me he explicado bien, pero creo que es bastante claro: las personas LGTBI NO son feministas, y sus demandas NO son igualitarias
Pride is always a moment of celebration and vindication for many people who might have been felt alone. It is a moment to claim their rights and the pride of being who they are and loving who they want to love. "The Minister recalled that" we are making history after fifteen years without progress on LGTBI rights after the approval of equal marriage "and wanted publicly thank the "merit of LGTBI groups and people and also of the feminist movement that understands that either we all take off the sticky soils or none will come. There are thousands of feminist women in this country who are convinced that as long as human rights are guaranteed, we become a better society for all
a minister of a government that has cut social rights and education, that has cut budgets for the fight against male violence, and that has neglected all the requests of the feminist movement presents herself as a feminist... "LGTBI people and their demands are not necessarily feminist" (and here the confusion begins). In fact, "the struggle for the rights of LGTBI people is not a feminist struggle because it is not focussed on equality"... I do not know if I have explained myself well, but I think it is quite clear: LGTBI people are NOT feminists, and their demands are NOT about equality
United Nations statement on discrimination against women
States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women in all matters relating to marriage and family relations and in particular shall ensure, on a basis of equality of men and women. Including, the same rights to decide freely and
The right to an abortion is a human right. (repeated)
