title: FedSIR: Spectral Client Identification and Relabeling for Federated Learning with Noisy Labels
source: arxiv
year: 2026
document_id: fedsir-spectral-client-identification-and-relabeling-for-federated-learning-with-noisy-labels
authors: Sina Gholami; Abdulmoneam Ali; Tania Haghighi; Ahmed Arafa; Minhaj Nur Alam
page: 1
section: document
chunk: 22
source_ref: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20825v1

← ∅
3:foreach(x i,˜yi)∈ D k do
4:z i ←f ϕclean(xi)
5:foreach classc= 1, . . . , Cdo
6:S (r)(i, c) =

z⊤
i ¯v(r)
c

7:S (n)(i, c) = 1√
L

z⊤
i ¯V(n)
c

2
8:end for
9:ˆy (r)
i ←arg max c S(r)(i, c)
10:ˆy (n)
i ←arg min c S(n)(i, c)
11:ifˆy (r)
i = ˆy(n)
i then
12:y ⋆
i ←ˆy(r)
i
13:else
14:y ⋆
i ←˜yi
15:end if
16:D ⋆
k ← D ⋆
k ∪ {(xi, y⋆
i )}
17:end for
18:returnD ⋆
k
19:end function
tion rounds. In Stage I, each client performs local training
forE 1 = 5epochs for client identification, using a learning
rate (LR) of5×10 −5 and a weight decay (WD) of2×10 −2.
In Stage II, local updates are performed forE 2 = 1epoch
per round using LR= 3×10 −4 and WD= 5×10 −4, while
spectral relabeling is performed everyR= 20communication rounds using the topL= 12residual right singular
vectors. In all experiments, local models are optimized using the Adam optimizer. We use an ImageNet-pretrained
ResNet-18 [6] as the backbone model. We compare our
method with standard FL baselines and recent noise-robust
FL approaches. In addition, we include a pruning baseline
that evaluates the performance obtained by excluding identified noisy clients.
Table 1 shows that our method consistently achieves the
best performance across nearly all noise levels and heterogeneity settings. In the highly non-IID case (α= 0.1),
our method remains robust even under severe noise, outperforming baselines such as FedELC, FedNoRo, and FedNed.
As the data distribution becomes less heterogeneous (α=
0.5andα= 2), the performance of all methods generally
improves; however, our approach continues to maintain a
clear advantage, particularly at high noise rates where reliable client identification and conservative relabeling become more critical. These results indicate that the proposed spectral client identification and relabeling strategy
provides robustness to both label noise and client heterogeneity.
5. Conclusion
We introducedFedSIR, a robust FL framework for noisylabel settings that exploits the consistency of class-wise
feature representations to identify clean and noisy clients.
The identified clean clients are then used to construct spectral references that enable noisy clients to relabel potentially corrupted samples by associating them with the closest clean class subspace. Furthermore, our framework integrates LA, KD, and DaAgg to stabilize federated optimization.
Results across a range of label-noise levels and non-IID
data distributions show thatFedSIRconsistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods, highlighting the effectiveness of spectral information as a reliable supervisory signal
in noisy-label FL. Overall, our findings indicate that clientlevel spectral geometry provides a principled foundation for
robust FL under corrupted supervision.
An important direction for future work is to extend the
proposed framework to handle more complex noise patterns, such as asymmetric label noise.
6. Acknowledgement
The work of S. Gholami, T. Haghighi, and M. N. Alam
was supported by the U.S. National Institute of Health
- National Eye Institute under Grants R15EY035804 and
R21EY035271. The work of A. Ali and A. Arafa was
supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation under
Grant ECCS 21-46099.
7
